                                   12
        General l enormaliz tion Theor y



We saw in the previous chapter that calculations in quantum electrody-
 namics involving one-loop graphs yield divergent integrals over momen-
 tum space, but that these infinities cancel when we express all parameters
 of the theory in terms of `renormalized' quantities, such as the masses
and charges that are actually measured. In 1949 Dyson] sketched a proof
 that this cancellation would take place to all orders in quantum electrody-
namics. It was immediately apparent (and will be shown here in Sections
 12.1 and 12 .2) that Dyson's arguments apply to a larger class of theories
with finite numbers of relatively simple interactions, the so-called renar-
malizabte theories, of which quantum electrodynamics is just one simple
example .
   For some years it was widely thought that any sensible physical theory
would have to take the form of a renormalizable quantum field theory .
The requirement of renormalizability played a crucial role in the devel-
opment of the modern `standard model' of weak, electromagnetic, and
strong interactions . But as we shall see here, the cancellation of ultravi-
olet divergences does not really depend on renormalizability ; as long as
we include every one of the infinite number of interactions allowed by
symmetries, the so-called non-renormalizable theories are actually just as
renormalixable as renormalizahle theories.
   It is generally believed today that the realistic theories that we use
to describe physics at accessible energies are what are known as `effec-
tive field theories .' As discussed in Section 12 .3, these are low-energy
approximations to a more fundamental theory that may not be a field
theory at all . Any effective field theory necessarily includes an infinite
number of non-renormalizable interactians . Ncvertheless, as discussed in
Sections 12.3 and 12 .x, we expect that at sufficiently low energy all the
non-renormalizable interactions in such effective field theories are highly
suppressed . Renormalixable theories like quantum electrodynamics and
the standard model thus retain their special status in physics, though for
reasons that are somewhat different from those that originally motivated
the assumption of renormalizability in these theories .

                                    499
500                  1 2 General R enoralizatian Theory

                      12 .1 Degrees of Divergence

Let us consider a very general sort of theory, containing interacti ons of
varying types labelled i . Each interaction may be characterized by the
number n;f of fields of each type f, and by the number di of derivatives
acting on these fields .
   We will start by calculating the ` superficial degree of divergence' D of
an arbitrary connected one-particle irreducible Feynman d iagram in such
a theory. This is the number of factors of momentum in the numerator
minus the numbe r in the denominator of the integrand , plus four for every
independent four-momentum over which we integrate . The superficial
dive rgence is the actual degree of divergence of the i ntegration over the
region of momentum space in which the momenta of all inte rnal lines
go to infinity together. That is, if D    0, then the part of the amplitude
where all internal momenta go to infin ity with a common factor K --* ova
will di verge like
                                   x
                                       rcD-' dre .

In the same sense, an integral with degree of divergence D = 0 is loga-
rithmically divergent, and an integral with D < 0 is convergent, at least
as far as this region of momentum space is concerned . We will come back
later to the problem posed b y subintegrations that behave worse than the
integral over this region.
   To calculate D, we will need to know the following about the diagram :

              If    number of internal lines of field type f ,
              Ef    number of external lines of field type f ,
              Ni    number of vertices of interaction type i .

We will write the asymptotic behavior of the propagator d f (k) of a field
of type f in the form

                              Af (k) - k -' + -"f                     ( 12.1 .2 )
Looking back at Chapter 6, we see that sf = 0 for scalar fields, sf =
for Dirac fields, and sf = 1 for massive vector fields . More generally,
it can be shown that for massive fields of Lorentz transformation type
(A, B), we have sf = A + B . Speaking loosely, we may call sf the `spin .'
However, dropping terms that because of gauge invariance have no effect,
the effective photon propagator r~,,,/k 2 has sf = 0. A similar result applies
to a massive vector field coupled to a conserved current, provided the
current does not depend on the vector field. It can also be shown that, in
the same sense, the graviton field g,,,, has propagator also with sf = D.
                            12.1 Degrees of Divergence                       50 1

  According to (12 .1 .2), the propagators make a total contribution to D
equal to
                                 Y: If (2 sf - 2)                      (12 . 1 .3
                                 f
Also, the derivatives in each interaction of type i introduce di momentum
factors into the integrand, yielding a total contribution to D equal t o
                                        Nj di .                        (12 .1 .4)

Finally, we need the total number of independent momentum variables
of integration . Each internal line can be labelled with afour-momentum,
but these are not all independent ; the delta function associated with
each vertex imposes a linear relation among these internal momenta,
except that one delta function only serves to enforce conservation of
the external momenta . Thus, the momentum space integration volume
elements contribute to D a ter m

                        4 If -               Nj -       1   (12. 1 . 5)
                         f
which, of course, is just four times the number of independent loops in
the diagram. Adding the contributions (1 2. 1 .3), (12.1.4), and (12 .1 .5), we
find


                        f
  Eq. (1 11 .6) is not very convenient as it stands, because it gives a value
for D that seems to depend on the internal details of the Feynman diagram .
Fortunately, it can be simplified b y using the topological identities
                              2If + Ef Nj nif ,                        (12.1 .7)

(Each internal line con tributes two of the lines attached to vertices, while
each external line contributes only one .) Using Eq . (12.1 .7) to eliminate
If, we see that Eq . ( 1 2.1 .6) become s

                                                                       (12.1 .8 )
                                 f                  i

where d; is a parameter characterizing interactions of type i
                                                                       (12.1 .9)

  This result could have been obtained by simple dime nsional analysis,
without considering the structure of Feynman diagrams . The propagator
502                       12 General Renormalization Theory

 of a field is a four-dimensional Fourier transform of the vacuum ex-
 pectation value of a time-ordered product of a pair of free fields, so a
conventionally normalized field f w hose dimens ionality* in powers of mo-
mentum is 'f will have a propagator of d i mensionality -4 -}- 2-9f, Hence
if the propagator behaves like k -2+2,f when k is much larger than the
mass, then the field must have a dimensionality with -4+2-qj = -2 + 2 sf,
 or 9f = 1 + s f . An interaction i with nif such fields and di derivatives will
 then have dimensionality dd + l:f raif (I +s f ) . But the action mu st be dimen-
 sionless, so each term in the Lagrangian density must have dimensionality
 + 4 to cancel the dimensionality -4 of d 4 x. Hence the interaction must
have a coupling constant ❑f dimensionality 4 - d, - Ef nif (1 + sf ), which is
j ust the parameter ❑j. The momentum space amplitude corresponding to
a connected Feynman graph with Ef exter nal lines of t ype f is the Fourier
 transform over 4 X:f Ef coordinates of a vacuum expectati on value of the
time-ordered product of fields with a total dimensionality J:f Ef ( 1 + sf ),
so it has d imensional ity f Ef (-3 + sf ). Of this dimens i onality, -4 comes
from a momentum space delta function, and Ef Ef(-2 + 2sf) is the
dimensionality of the propagators for the external lines , so the momen-
tum space i ntegral i tself together with all coupling constant factors has
dimensionalit y
      I:Ef(-3 + sf) - (-4) - 1:-Ef(-2 + 2,5f) = 4 - EEf(sf + 1)
       f              f                             J
The coupling constants for a given Feynman graph have total dimension-
ality i Ni Aia leaving the momentum space integral with dimensionality
4 - Ef Ef (sf + 1) - j NA . As long as we are interested in the region
of integration where all momenta go to infinity together, the degree of
divergence of the momentum space integral is its dimensionality, thus
justifying Eq. (12.1 .8).
   If all interactions have d j ~!: 0, then Eq . (12. 1 .8) provides an upper
bound on D that depends only on the numbers of external lines of each
type, i.e., on the physical process whose amplitude is being calculate d
                                  D :< 4 - Ef(sf + 1 ) .                  (12 .1 .10)
                                          f
For example, in the simple version of quantum electrodynamics studied in
the previous chapter, the Lagrangian included terms of the types shown
in Table 12 .1 . All interactions here have d ; 0, and hence a Feynman
diagram with E , external photon lines and E, external Dirac lines wil l


 In this chapter, `dimensionality' will always refer In the dimensionality in powers of mass or
 momentum, in units with h = c = 1 . We are using fields that are conventionally normalized, in
 the sense that the term in the free-field [,agrangian with the largest number of derivatives (which
 determines the asymptotic behavior of the propagator) has a dimensionless coefficient .
                                 12.1 Degrees of Divergence                                           503


Table 12 .1 . Terms in the Lagrangian density for quantum electrodynamics . Here
di , nr_,, and nj,, are the numbers of derivatives, photon fields, and electron fields
in the interaction, and d i is the dimensionality of the corresponding coefficient .
(Recall that sr -= 4, S' ° ~ .~


               Interaction                          di     n i~     ni e               ❑i

                 ie ip-,Ay_a                      0 1 2                        4-1 - 3= U
              V3       I)FpvFPv                   2 2                0         4-2-2 0
            -(Z2 -- 1) iPk                        1  0               2         4 - 1 -3 = 0
                                                  0  0               2         4-3= I


have superficial degree of divergence bounded by Eq . (12.1 .10) :
                                      D ::~ 4 -T ~ E e - EY                                   ( 1 2 .1 . 11 )

Only a finite number of sets of external lines can yield superficially
divergent integrals, these will be enumerated in Section 12 .2. We are going
to show that the limited number of divergences that appear in theories
with ❑i    0 for all interactions are automatically removed by a redefinition
of a finite number of physical constants and a renormalization of fields .
For this reason, such theories are called renormah zable . In Section 12 .3 we
will catalog all the renormalizable theories, and discuss the significance of
renormalizability as a criterion for physical theories .
   The term `renormaliza6le' is also applied to individual interactions .
Renormali7able interactions are those with dz 0, whose coupling con-
stants have positive or zero dimensionality. Sometimes one distinguishes
between interactions with d j = 0 , called simply renormalizable, and those
with Al > 0, called superrenarmaliz ahle. Since adding additional fields
or derivatives always lowers A z, there can only be a finite number of
renormalizable interactions involving fields of any given types . We have
seen that all the interactions in the simplest version of quantum electro-
dynamics are renormalizable, with the tip terms superrenormalizable .
   On the other hand, if any interaction has Aj             0, the degree of di-
vergence (12 .1 .8) becomes larger and larger the more such vertices we
include . No matter how large we take the various E f , eventually with
enough vertices of type i for which d j < 0, E q. ( 12.1 .8) will become positive
(or zero), and the integral will diverge . Such interactions, whose couplings
have negative-definite dimensionality, are called non-retzormaliZable ;" the-


  [in perturbative statistical mechanics, non-renol`mali7ahlc interactions are called irrelevant, because
  they become less important in the limit of low energies . Renormalirahle and super-renormalixable
  interactions are cared marginal and relevant, respectively .
504                   12 General Renarmalxzation Theory




Figure 12 .1 . Some two-loop graphs for Compton scattering . Here straight lines
are electrons ; wavy lines are photons. The momentum space integra] for diagram
(a) is convergent, while for (b) and (c) it is divergent, due to the subintegration
associated with the subgraphs surrounded by dotted lines .


cries wi th any non-renorm a lizable interactions are also known as non-
renormali 7able . But this does not mean that such theories are hopeless ; we
shall see that these divergences may also be absorbed into a redefinition
of the parameters of the theory, but here we need an infinite number of
couplings.
     It should be kept in mind that we have here calculated the degree of
 divergence of Feynman diagrams aris ing on ly from regions of momentum ,
 space in which all internal four-momenta go to infinity together . Diver-
 gences can also arise from regions in which only the four-m ome nta o f
lines belonging to some subgraph go to infinity . For instance, in quantum
electrodynamics Eq. (12 . 1A Z) gives D ~ - 1 for Co mpton scatte ri ng (where
Ee - 2, ET = 2 ), and indeed graphs like Figure 12 .1(a) are convergent , but
a graph like Figure 12.1(b) or 1 2.1 (c) is logarithmically di vergent, because
these graphs contain subgr aphs (indicated by dotted boxes) with D ~ 0.
We can think of the divergence of these graphs as being due to an anoma-
lously bad asymptotic behav i or that occurs when the eight components of
the two independent internal four-momenta of these graphs go to infinity
on a pa rticular four-dimensional subspace, namely, that subspace in which
the only four-momentum actually going to infin ity is the one circulating
in the loops that are in serted in the internal lines or at an electron-photon
vertex.
   , It has been shown that the requirement for the actual convergence of
                             12.2 Cancellation of Divergences                                        505

the amplitude corresponding to any graph is that power-counting should
give D < 0 not only for the complete multiple integral for the whole
amplitude, but also for any subintegration defined by holding any one
or more linear combinations of the loop momenta fixed . (The graphs
shown in Figures 12. 1(b) and 12.1(c) fail this test because D   0 for the
subintegrations in which only the momenta for the loops within the dotted
squares are integrated .) We will not repeat the rather long proof here,
because it is well treated in earlier books,3 and in any case the method
of proof has little to do with how we actually do calculations . The next
section will describe how this requirement is fulfilled .



                         12 .2 Cancellation of Divergences

Consider a Feynman diagram, or part of a Feynman diagram, with positive
superficial degree of divergence, D ~ 0. The part of the momentum space
integral where all internal momenta go to infinity together will then
diverge, like F'°V -1 dk. If we differentiate D + 1 times with respect to
any external momentum, we lower the net number of momentum factors
in the integrand b y D + 1 ,' and hence render this part ❑ f the momentum
space integral convergent . There may still be divergences arising from
subgraphs, like those in Figures 1 2.1 ( b ) and 12.1(c) ; for the moment we
will ignore this possibility, returning to it later in this section . Since
differentiation D + 1 times renders the integral finite, it follows that the
contribution of such a graph or subgraph can be written as a polynomial
of order D in external momenta, with divergent coefficients, plus a finite
remainder.
  To see how this works without irrelevant complications, consider the
logarithmically divergent one-dirnensional integra l
                                                            dk
                                    j
with D = I - I = 0. Differentiating once give s
                                                       dk 1
                                                    (k + q)2 q
so
                                       _0~( q ) = -Ing+c .


' For instance, if an internal scalar field line carries a momentum k + p, where p is a linear
  combination of external four-momenta and k is a fou r-momentum variable of integration . then the
  derivative of the propagator [( k+p)3 + m 2] -1 with respect to p+` givc1 -2 ( kj, +p") L( k+p) ' + M,
  which goes as k -3 rather than k-2 for k ---> oo.
506        12 General Renormalization Theory

The constant c is obviously divergent, but the rest of the integral is
perfectly finite . In exactly the same way, we can evaluate the D = 1
integral

                            k dk -
                                   a+bq+q In q
                         a k+ q
with divergent constants a and b.
   Now, a polynomial term in external momenta is just what would be
produced by adding suitable terms to the Lagrangian : if a graph with Ef
external lines of type f has degree of divergence D ~ 0, then the ultraviolet
divergent polynomial is the same as would be produced by adding various
interactions i with nif = Ef fields of type f and d; :!9 D derivatives. If
there already are such interactions in the Lagrangian, then the ultraviolet
divergences simply add corrections to the coupling constants of these
interactions . Hence these infinities can be cancelled by including suitable
infinite terms in these coupling constants . All that we ever measure is
the sum of the bare coupling constant and the corresponding coefficient
from one of the divergent polynomials, so if we demand that the sum
equals the (presumably finite) measured value, then the bare coupling
must automatically contain an infinity that cancels the infinity from the
divergent integral over internal momenta, (One qualification : where the
divergence occurs in a graph or subgraph with just two external lines,
which appears as a radiative correction to a particle propagator, we must
demand not that some effective coupling constant equals its measured
value, but rather that the complete propagator has a pole at the same
position and with the same residue as for free particles .) In this way, all
infinities are absorbed into a redefinition of couplings constants, masses,
and fields.
    For this renormalization program to work, it is essential that the La-
grangian include all interactions that correspond to the ultraviolet diver-
gent parts of Feynman amplitudes . (There are exceptions to this rule
in supersymmetric theories .4) The interactions in the Lagrangian are, of
course, limited by various symmetry principles, such as Lorentz invari-
ance, gauge invariance, etc ., but these constrain the ultraviolet divergences
in the same way . (It takes some work to prove that non-Abelian gauge
symmetries constrain infinities in the same way that they constrain inter-
actions . This will be shown in Volume II . ) In the general case, there are
no other limitations on the ultraviolet divergences, so the Lagrangian must
include every possible term consistent with symmetry princ iples.
    But there is an important class of theories with only a finite number
o f interactions, where the renormalization program also works . These are
the so-called renormalizable theories, whose interactions all have ❑ j L: 0.
                            12. 2 Cancellation of Divergences                                    507

Eq. ( l x..1 . 8) then gives

                                  ~~~ ~            Ef ( 5f + 1) ,


so divergent polynomials arise in only a limited number of Feynman
graphs or subgraphs : those with few enough external lines so that D ~ 0.
The contribution of such divergent polynomials is just the same as would
be produced by replacing the divergent graph or subgraph with a single
vertex arising from a term in the Lagrangian with Ef fields of type f and
0,1,. . . D derivatives. But, comparing with Eq . (12 .1 .9), we see that these
are precisely the same as the interactions that satisfy the rertormalizubality.
requirement ~j ~ 0, or in other words ,


                                                  f
   In order for all infinities to cancel in a renormalizable theory, it is
usually necessary that all renormalizable interactions that are allowed by
symmetries must actually appear in the Lagrangian . " For instance, if there
is a scalar (or pseudoscalar) field 0 and fermion field yi with interactions
ip-WO (or V,'Ys~k* then we cannot exclude an interaction 04 ; otherwise there
would be no counterterm to cancel the logarithmic divergence arising from
fermion loops with four attached scalar or pseudoscalar lines .
   Let's see in more detail how the cancellation of infinities works in the
simplest version of quantum electrodynamics . Eq. (12.1 .11 ) shows that the
only graphs or subgraphs that could possibly yield divergent integrals are
the following

Ee = 2 ,Ey= 1

This is the electron-photon vertex T'~~)(p',P)- {The superscript ( indicates
that this includes only contributions from graphs with loops .) It has D = 0 ,
so its divergent part is momentum-independent . Lorentz invariance then
only allows this divergent constant to be proportional to ~ ., so

                                       VA() + I'~`f
                                                  [                 1         (12.2.1 )

with L a logarithmically divergent constant, and r(f ~ finite . This does not
uniquely define the constant L, since we can always move a finite ter m


  In xddi#ian, interactions and mass terms that are not allowcd by global symmetries may appear
  in the Lagrangian, as long as they are super renormaliaable, that is, with d ; > 0. This is
  because the presence of a superrenormalizable coupling lowers the degree of divergence, so
  that the symmetry breaking does not affect those divergences that are cancelled by the strictly
  rennrrnalizahle couplings with d~ = D . Note that it is the bare strictly rennrmalixabJc couplings
  that would exhibit the symmetry ; renarmaliaed couplings that are defined in terms of mass-shell
  matrix elements generally show the effect of symmetry breaking .
508                 12 General Renormali zation Theory

6 L y ,, from T~f) to Lys . To complete the definition, we may note that as
shown in Section 9 .7, the mass-shell matrix element of I` A( p, p ) and hence
of F(J )(p ,P ) between mass-shell Dirac spinors is proportional to the same
matrix element of ,41, so we may define L by the prescription tha t



for p 2 + m~ = 0.



This is the electron self-energy insertion V(p). It has D = 1, so its
divergent part is linear in the momentum carried by the incoming and
outgoing fermion . Lorentz invariance (including parity conservation) will
only allow it to be a function of ~, so we may write the loop contribution
as

                    11"( P) = A - { i j + rra}B + E( .f) ( J ) s      (12 .23
where A and B are divergent constants , and F-W is finite. Again, this does
not uniquely define the constants A and B, because we can always shift
E[f} by a fi nite first-order polynomial in J. We will define A and B by
the prescript ion that

                     Z(f]            =0 for i ~ _ -m .                (12.2.4)

Actually, B is not a new divergent constant . As long as we use a
regularization procedure that respects current conservation, F . and E will
be related by the Ward identity (10,4 .27)


                                                pj,
and therefore


                                                      Op
Taking the matrix element of this equation between i~(p, or') and u(p, a)
and using Eqs. (12.2.2) and (12.2.4), we find
                                     L= B ,                           (12 .2.6)
Ey -2, E ~=0

This is the photon self-energy insertion II~ , (q ). It has D -- 2, so its
divergent part is a second-order polynomial in q . Lorentz invariance only
allows I ] ;, to take the form of a linear combination of q,,, and q,, qy with
                       12. 2 Cancellation of Divergences                        509

coefficients depending only on q 2 , so the loop contributions take the form

                    = C 1 1p + C2 1pv q2 + C3quqv + finite terms ,
where C 1 , C2, and C3 are divergent constants . As long as we use a
regularization technique that respects current conservation, we must hav e
                                 q111141(q) == 0 .

The same must then be true for the divergent terms, so CIgV+(C2+C 3) q l q,
must be finite for all q . It follows that Ci and C2 + C 3 must be finite, and
can therefore be lumped into the finite part of II~;) (q ). Thus



where g( q2) is finite and C is the sole remaining divergence in To
pin down the definition of C, we may move any finite constant g(O) into
C, so that
                                    7r(D) = 0 .                             (12.2.8 )
Ey = 4, E, = 0

This is the amplitude for scattering of ligh t by light. It has D = 0,
so using Lorentz invariance and Bose statistics, it may be written (there
is no non-loop contribution )
           M~ vpfT - K ( qju u qpy + qjupqjg + npTq wp)   + finite term s
with K a potentia lly divergent constant . However, current conservation
gives


and so K (qvqpd + q pq wa + q ,tj U p ) is finite . In order for this to be true
for q * 0, K must itself be finite . This is a nice example of the role o f
symmetry principles in the renorrnalixatian program ; if K had turned out
to be infinite it could not be removed by renormalization of the coupling
constant for an interaction (A y Ag) 3, because no such interaction is allowed
by gauge invariance, but K is finite because of current conservation
conditions that are imposed by gauge invariance .
E7 = l., E, = 0 and E, = 1 , Fy = D, 1, 2

These have D = 3 and D = 5 , 3 and z, respectively, but Lorentz invariance
makes all such graphs vanish ,
E? = 3, Ee _ 0
This has D = 1, but vanishes because of charge-conjugation invariance .
51 0                  12 Genera l Rsrtarrnalizatinn Theory

   The reader will perhaps have noticed that the independent divergent
constants A, B, C are in one-to-one correspondence with the independent
parameters Z2, Z1, and 6m in the counterterm part (11 .1 .9) of the La-
grangian for quantum electrodynamics . These counterterms make a direct
contribution Z; b rn - (Z2 - i ) (i # + m) to E" ( P ). The requirement that
the position and residue of the one-particle pole be the same as in the
free-field propagator means we must choose Z2 and bm so that the total
V (P) satisfies Eq. (12.2.4), i.e .,

                                     ~~ 6M = -A, {12.2. 9 }


so that the complete electron self-energy insertion is just the finite function
 W(P)
                               I(P ) = I f.fl(F ) .                     (12 .2.11 )
Also, Y2 makes a direct contribution to I",, equal to V2 - 1)Y,, . Using
Eq . (12 .2 .6), we see that the full vertex is

                                                                               (12.2 .12)
This is not only finite, but satisfies the conditio n
                   a( P, a {) Fi{ (P?P)U(R, CT) = F1 (P, C') 7p U (As 6f ) a

as can also be seen from Eqs. (10.6. Z 3 ) and (10.6.14) . Finally, Y7 makes a
contribution -(Z3 - 1)(R2r~~jv -R,,gti, ) to II~,, (q)- In order that the photon
propagator should have a pole with the same residue as for free fields we
need the coefficient of q2 ~p u - q,, v q, in the total II ,..,(q) to vanish, so

                                       Z3   = I +C                             ( 1 2.2. 1 4)

and the photon propagator is then finite :

                                                                               (12 .2.15)
   So far, we have only checked that the divergences, arising from the re-
gion of momentum space in which all internal momenta are large (and with
generic ratios), are polynomials in external momenta that are cancelled
by suitable counterterms . Such graphs are called superficially convergent .
Before we conclude that all ultraviolet divergences actually are removed
by renormalization, we need to consider the ultraviolet divergences aris-
ing in higher-order graphs when some subset of the momentum space
integration variables rather than all of them go to infinity . For instance,
in quantum electrodynamics the superficial divergences in subintegrations
come from subgraphs that are either photon self-energy parts II', or elec-
tron self-energy parts 1 ', or electron-electron-photon vertices I'4 . The
                            1 2. 2 Cancellation of Divergence s                                   51 1




                                                              (~~-~) a




                            ( ZZ -1 ) 2                               ( Z 3 - 1 )overlap

Figure 12 .2. Some fourth-order graphs for the photon self-energy in quantum
electrodynamics that involve overlapping divergences . Lines carrying arrows are
electrons ; wavy lines photons . The crosses mark the contribution of counterterms .


problem with such divergences is that they cannot be removed by dif-
ferentiati on with re spect to external momenta ; we are left with terms
where the derivati ves act only on internal lines in the parts of the graph
which are not in the divergent subgraphs, and therefore do not reduc e the
degree of diver gence of these subgraphs . As mentioned in the previous
section, a graph or sum of graphs is actually convergent only if it and all
its subintegrations are super ficially convergent , in the sense of counting
powers of momentum . But wherever such a divergent subgraph appears ,
it always comes accompanied with an infinite count e rterm . In clectrody-
                                                                  2 j~"
namics, these are the terms in Eq. X11 .1 .9 : a term -( Z3 -1)( q r - q{jq u )
for each I-I*, V (q) ; a term Z26 m, - V2 - 00 j + rte) for each V(p) ; and
a term (Z2 --- 1)7,' for each I'P. Just as for the graph as a whole, these
counterterms cancel the infinit ies from the divergent s ubgraph s. 1
   Unfortunately, there is a fl aw in this simple argument - th e possibilit y
of overlapping divergences . That is, it is possib le that two divergent
subgraphs may share an internal l ine, so that w e cannot regard them as
i ndependent d i vergent integrals . In quantum electrodynamics this happens
only when two electron-electron-photon vertices overlap inside a photon
or an electron self-energy insert ion, as shown in Figures 12 .2 an d 12. 3.
   A complet e treatment of renormalization that takes account of overlap-


 t The sharing of a line in two self-energy insertions or in a self-energy insertion and a vertex
   part would not leave enough external lines to attach such a subgraph to the rest of the
   diagram . Nistoricaliy, the Ward identity (10.4 .26) was used to by-pass the problem of overlapping
   divergences in the electron self-energy, by expressing the electron self-energy in terms of the
   vertex function, where overlapping divergences do not occur . This approach will not be followed
   here, as it is unnecessary, and in any case does not solve the problem for the self-energy of the
   photon or other neutral particles .
512                       1 2 General Rertarmalizattorz t'heor'y


                                                             ---~

                                                                 (2 2 - ] ) Z




                               {2z -02                                          Z 3 -1 ) o verlap

Figure 12 .3. Some fourth-order graphs for the electron self-energy in quantum
electrodynamics that involve overlapping divergences . Wavy lines are photons,
other lines are electrons . The crosses mark the contribution of counterterms .

ping divergences should include a prescription for eliminating superficial
ultraviolet divergences, not only in the overall integration but in all subin-
tegrations as well, together with a proof that this prescription is (at least
formally) implemented by renormalization of masses, fields, and coupling
constants . The theorem of Ref. 2 then ensures that all Green's functions
of renormalized fields are finite when expressed in terms of renormalized
masses and couplings. The first proof that the renormalization of fields,
couplings, and masses renders the whole integration and all its subinte-
grations superficially divergent was offered by 5alatn .' A more specific
prescription for eliminating ultra-violet divergences was given by Bogali-
ubov and Farasiuk, 6 and corrected by Hepp, 7 and shown by them to be
equivalent to a renormalization of fields, masses, and coupling constants .
Finally, Zimmerman8 proved that this prescription does eliminate all su-
perficial divergences in the whole integration and all its subintegrations,
and used the theorem of Ref. 2 to conclude from this that the renormalized
Feynman momentum-space integrals are convergent .
   Briefly, the `HPHZ' prescription for eliminating superficial divergences
requires that we consider all possible ways (called 'forests') of surrounding
a whole graph and/or its subgraphs with boxes that may be nested within
each other but do not overlap. (An example is given below.) For each
forest we define a subtraction term by replacing the integrand for any
subgraph of superficial divergence D within a box (starting with the
innermost boxes and working outwards) with the first D + 1 terms of its
Taylor series expansion in the momenta flowing into or out of that bvx, T


 As described here, this prescription applies to unrenormalixable as well as renorrnalixable theories .
 In renormalizable theories it implies that there is no subtraction unless the box contains one of
 the limited number of graphs corresponding to renorrnalicabZe terms in the Lagrangian .
                     1 2. 2 Cancellation of Divergences                                      51 3

The subtracted Feynman amplitude is given by the original graph, minus
all these subtraction terms, including the subtraction term for a forest
consisting of a single box surrounding the whole graph .
   It is fairly easy to see that the subtracted Feynman amplitude that is
calculated in this way is the same as would be obtained by replacing
all fields, coupling constants, and masses in the original Lagrangian by
their renormalized caunterparts . The difference between this procedure
and the sort of renormalization we carried out in Chapter 11 is that the
renormalized fields, coupling constants, and masses are defined in terms
of amplitudes at a unconventional renormalization point, where all four-
momenta vanish . (In this respect, the any-dimensional divergent integrals
discussed at the start of this section provide an elementary example of the
BPHZ method of separating divergent terms .) But there is nothing special
about this renormalization point ; ❑ nce a Feynman amplitude is made
convergent by expressing it in terms of these unconventional renormalized
quantities, it can be rewritten in terms of conventionally renormalized
fields, couplings, and masses without introducing new infinities .
   It is not necessary to use the BPHZ subtraction prescription in practice .
Replacing fields, masses, and couplings with their renormalized counter-
parts (defined using any convenient renormalization points) automatically
provides counterterms that cancel all infinities . Instead of proving that the
BPHZ subtraction prescription really does make all integrals converge,
we shall just look at one example that shows how renormalization works,
even in the presence of overlapping divergences .
   Consider the fourth-order contribution to the photon self-energy inser-
tion W',M } shown in Figure 12.2. (The forests here consist of the whole
integral over p and p', the subintegration over p alone, and the subinte-
gration over p' alone .) Including the corresponding counterterms for the
vertex parts and photon field renormalization, this has the valu e


                         2~r                   ( P -T p')
                                  r {S ( pr) Yv S (Pr + q) x',xT P S (p + q) Yp S (F} Y p
                                    e' d 4
                      -2 V2 - 02 (27C )    p Tr ~y, S(p + q),ip S(p)

                      - (Z 3 - I)overiap (q 2q fu }' - qtjq v ) ,                    ( 1 2 . 2 . 1 6)
where S(p) - j -i j + M] 1 I p2 + M2 - a ,_] ; ~ ZZ - 02 is the term in Z2 - 1
of second order in e ; and V3 - 1)Qveflap is a logarithmically divergent
constant of fourth order in e that cancels the terms in [II j*iu(q)]overlap of
second order in qf. . The factor 2 in the second term arises because there is
a renormalization counterterm Z2 - 1 for each of the two vertices in the
second-order photon self-energy . Note, however, that the first term here
514                            12 General Renormalization Theory

can be thought of either as the insertion of a vertex correction given by
the p'-integral into a photon self-energy given by the p-integral, or as the
insertion of a vertex correction given by the p-integral into a photon self-
energy given by the p'-integral, but not as the insertion of two independent
vertex corrections, because there is only one photon propagator .
  To see how to handle the infinities in Eq. ( 1 2 , 21 6), note tha t

                           -                   ie 2
      RZ2 - 02 + ,R21 '~"P                                                       t S ( p' )71 ,            (12.2 .17)
                                           ~
                                               2_g)4
                                                         P r2   ic "r'~ S W) ,'f

where R2 is a finite remainder. (Lorentz invariance tells us that the integral
on the right is proportional to y~,. The difference between this integral and
(Z2. - 021. equals the complete renormalized electron-electron-photon
vertex to second order in e at zero electron and photon momenta, and is
therefore finite .) This allows us to rewrite Eq. (1 2 .2 . 16) in the for m

                                          e~
      [ri *P v (q)] overlap - -                        d4 p j d'p l
                                        (2 Tt g

            x _ ' ~ i ~~Tr {S ( P'} "~~ S( Pf + q) yP S(p + q) f' u S(p) ~p }
                     (P PT
                                                                             q ) 7' jj S ( P ) Y p I
                          12 i ie T r f S(P' ) Yv S(Pf ) f' P S (P +
                      P
                               1
                           2       ie                                  (   S(P)Y'US(P)TP~
                      P                                                                                ]
                ie
      -2 R2 (27C) 4
                                   2qk
      - V 3 - i } averlap ( R            cv - qu ql,) .               (12.2.8 )

First consider integration over p' alone . Each of the first two terms is
logarithmically divergent, but their difference is finite . The third term is
also logarithmically divergent (with a gauge-invariant regulator), but the
divergence in this term (unlike the first two terms) takes the form of a
second-order polynomial in q, with the remainder finite . This remaining
divergence is cancelled by the term -(Z3 - 1 )(q2 - ql`q") that cancels all
second-order terms in the expansion of I 1* u(q}• So the p'-subintegration
gives a finite result . The symmetry of Eq . ( 1 2.2. 1 +5) shows that in exactly
the same way the p subintegration also gives a finite result. Generic
subintegrations over p and p' with ap + bp' held fixed (where a and
h are arbitrary non-zero constants) are manifestly convergent, and the
integration over p and p' together is made finite by the counterterm
- (Z3 - t) ( q ' -- q l `q ') . Thus Eq . (12.2.18) and any of its subintegrations
satisfy the power-counting requirements for convergence, and therefore
                          12.2 Cancellation of Divergences                              515

according to the theorem quoted in the previous section, the whole
expression actually converges .
                                ** ~

   In electrodynamics there is a natural definition of renormalized cou-
plings as well as renormalized masses and fields . This is not always the
case . For example, consider the theory of a single reai scalar field 4 (x)
with Lagrangian density

                              1                                g
                                               im W_
                                               2
                                                                                        (12.2.19)
                              2

To one-loop order, the S-matrix for scalar-scalar scattering is given by
the Feynman rules as




                                                                                        ( 1 2.2.20)
where
                                                            2 2
        _42,E)4 F(q I q2 --3, q'q') = -i(27c)'g + i(27r)4gj (27r) 4


              x j A
                           [(qi + k)2 + M2 _ ie] [(q, - k )2 + M2 - je]

                                                              -q l


and qt, q2 and q ' , q~ are the incoming and outgoing four-momenta . Com-
bining denominators and rotating the k°-integration contour as usual, this
is


 F = g -- 1           /k3dk           die Ck2 + rra2 - x( 1        x)
              672 ,               O                                     }J
                                                                             X)]
                                  X)] -2 + [k2 + M2 _ UX(I
        + [k 2 + M 2 _ tX(I -                                                      -2 (12.2 .22)


where s, t, and u are the Mandelstam variables
                      }                            2                         ' )2'       ( 1 2.2. 2 3 )

related by s + t + u = 4m2 ; also, x is the Feynman parameter introduced
in combining denominators . With an ultraviolet cutoff at k T A, this gives
516                       12 General Renormalization Theor y

the result (for A > m)
                 2  1                                   A2
        ~ g ~ 32~Z ~ dx                  In
                                               m2 - sx(I - x )

                                  ~             A2
                                                                                         . (12.2.24
               + n m2 - tx (j - x )            + In m2 - ux(1 - x) ~ ~

We can define the renormalized coupling gx as the value of F at any point
s, t, u we like, provided we stay in the region where F is real. For instance,
suppose that in order t o maintain the symmetry among the scalars , we
choose to renorm alize at the off-mass-shell pointl pi = p~ =pig = p~ 2
~2 , s - t = u = - 4~.2 J3. Defining the renorrrralized coupling g R as the
value of F at this point, we have
                                                                        - .X)      M 2) j +
                 3g2
                          In ~ ~ 1 -- i ~~x In ~~ ( 1    +
                             A                        3 it 2

The cutoff dependence then cancels in Eq . (12 .224) to order g~, leaving a
finite formula for F in terms of g R
                                       +4        ) 2
  F = gA _         9 ~~ ~ ~ d
                              . In nay    x(1 ` x ~ /3
                 3 2 K J o n~ sx I X )
                   2 + 4x(I - x) 'U2 /3                 ( in2 + 4 x ( 1 - x ) ,u '13       +
         + In ( '"                               + In
                    m2 - t ( l - x)                          m 2 - ux(1 - x )
                                                                                            (12.2.26)
Here y~ may be taken to be and real quantity greater than -3m2, in which
range gR is real . The explicit {u-dependence in Eq. (12.2,25) is, of course,
cancelled b y the p-dependence of the renormalized coupling. This freedom
to change the renormalization prescription (which of course exists also in
electrodynamics and other realistic theories will be of great importance
to us when we come to the renormalization group method in Volume 11.



                       1 2 .3 Is Ren o r ma lizabili ty Necessary?

In the previous section we found a special class of theories having only
a finite number ❑ f terms in the Lagrangian, to which the renormaliza-
tian program is nevertheless applicable . These are theories in which al l


~ Going back over the derivation of Eq . (12 .2 ,25 ) , one may check that in this derivation we have
  not used the conditions p~ = p~ = p'i 2 = pz2 = -m2, so F- q, (12 .2.24) is valid whatever we take
  for the external line masses.
                   1 2.3 Is Reraorrnalazabilixy Necessary?               51 7

interactions satisfy the renormalizability conditio n


                                     f
where di and nif are the numbers of derivatives and fields of type f in
interactions of type i, and sf is (with some qualifications) the spin of
fields of type f . For renormalization to work in such theories, it is also
usually necessary that all renormalizable interactions that are allowed by
symmetry principles should actually appear in the Lagrangian .
    It i s important that there are only a limited number of such interaction
types. ❑i becomes negative if we have too many fields or derivatives,
or fields of too high spin . Barring special cancellations, there are no
renorinalizable interactions at all involving fields with s f ~ 1, because the
only possible term in the Lagrangian with ❑j ~ 0 that involves such a field
along with two or more other fields would involve a single s f = 1 field
along with two scalars and no derivatives, which would not be Lorentz-
invariant . We shall see in volume II that general, massless, spin one gauge
fields in a suitable gauge effectively have s f = 0 , like the photon . Also,
in Volume II we shall see that even massive gauge fields may effectively
have sf = 0, depending on where their mass comes from . Leaving aside
these special cases, Table 12 .2 gives a list of all renormalizable terms in
the Lagrangian density that are allowed b y Lorentz invariance and gauge
invariance involving scalars (s = 0), photons (s = 0), and spin 21 fermions
{ 5 _ 21}•
    We see that the requirement of renormalizability puts severe restrictions
 on the variety of physical theories that we may consider . Such restrictions
 provide a valuable key to the structure of physical theories . For instance,
 Lorentz and gauge invariance by themselves would allow the introduc-
 tion of a `Pauli' term proportional to in the Lagrangian
 of quantum electrodynamics, which would make the magnetic moment
 of the electron an adjustable parameter, but we exclude such terms be-
 cause they are not renarmalizable . The successful predictions of quantum
 electrodynamics, such as the calculation of the magnetic moment of the
 electron outlined in Section 11 .3, may be regarded as validations of the
 principle of renormalizabilit .Thy same applies to the standard model of
 weak, electromagnetic, and strong interactions, to be discussed in Volume
 II ; there are and number of terms that might be added to this theory,
 such as four-fermion interactions among quarks and leptons, that would
 invalidate all the predictions of the standard model, and are excluded only
 because they are non-renormalizahle .
     Must we believe that the Lagrangian is restricted to contain only
 renormalizable interactions? As we saw in the previous section, if we
 include in the Lagrangian all of the infinite number of interactions allowed
5 18                 1 2 General Renormalization Theory


Table 12.2. Allowed renormalizable terms in a Lagrangian density involving
scalars 0, Dirac fields p,and photon fields AP. Here nr f and di are the number
of fields of type f and the number of derivatives in an interaction of type i, and
dj is the dimensionality of the associated coefficient ,



                       nif                       di       ❑i
       Scalars      Photons        Spin 2

          1             0             0           0       3
                       0                                               o2
                                      0           0
                       0              0                   0        01100-11 0

          3            0              0                    1          03

         4             0              0                   0           04

                                      0           1       0        00POAlt

                       2                         0                 o2 A u ~ ~~
                                      0                   0
          1            0              2          0        0         OVY
         0             2              0                   0        Fj Fla
                                                                      !V


         0             0                         0                    'f' Y`


         0             0              L           1       0        ollo,MW
         0             i              2          0        0        q) r "Amv



by symmetries, then there will be a counterterm available to cancel every
ultraviolet divergence . In this sense, as said earlier, non-renormalizable
theories are just as renormalizable as renormalzzable theories, as long as
we include all possible terms in the Lagrangian .
   In recent years it has become increasingly apparent that renormaliz-
ability is not a fundamental physical requirement, and that in fact any
realistic quantum field theory will contain non-renormalizable as well as
renormalizable terms . This change in point of view can be traced in part
to the continued failure to find a renormalizable theory of gravitation . In
the general class of metric theories of gravitation governed by Einstein's
principle of equivalence there are no renormalizable interactions at all -
generally covariant interactions must be constructed from the curvature
tensor and its generally covariant derivatives, and hence, even in a `gauge '
                          1 2 .3 Is Renarmal azQhil ity Necessary?                                51 9

where the graviton propagator goes as k-2, these interactions involve too
many derivatives of the metric for renorrnaliz bility . In particular, we can
easily see that genera] relativity is non-renormalizable from the fact that
its coupling constant 87~Gv = (2 .43 x 1Q1 8 GeV)-2 has negative dimen-
sionality. Even if nothing else did, the cancellation of divergences due to
virtual gravitons would require that the Lagrangian contain all interac-
tions allowed by symmetries -not only interactions involving gravitons,
but involving any particles .
   But if renormalizability is not a fundamental physical principle, then
how do we explain the success of renormalizable theories like quantum
electrodynamics and the standard model? The answer can be seen b y
simple dimensional analysis . We have already noted that the coupling
constant of an interaction of type i has dimensionalit y


when ❑d is the index (12.1 .9). Non-renormalizable interactions are just
those whose coupling constants have the dimensionality of negative powers
of mass . Now, it is not unreasonable to guess from (1 2.3 . 1) that the
coupling constants not only have dimensionalities governed by ❑ ;, but are
roughly of orde r



where M is some common mass . (This is found to be actually the
case in the effective field theories discussed below and in more detail in
Volume II .) I n cal culating physical processes at a characteristic momentum
scale k M , the inclusion of a non-renormalizable interaction of type
i with ❑i < 0 will introduce a factor gj NIA,, whi ch on dimensional
grounds must be accompan i ed by a factor k-A!, and so the e ffect of
such an interaction is suppressed* for k < Nf by a factor (k/!I{I}-°j < 1 .
(This argument will be made more carefully using the method of the
renormalization group in Volume II .) The success of the renormalizable
theories of electroweak and strong energies shows only that is very
much larger than the ene r gy scale at which these theories have been
tested.


'ft is essential at this point to assume that the ultraviolet divergences have been removed
  by rcnnrm aliaalion, so that there are no factors of an ultraviolet cutoff A to miss up our
  dimensional analysis . Otherwise, dimensional analysis tells us that for A -+ oc, each additional
  non-renormalizable coupling constant factor g, with Ai < 0 would be accompanied with a gxowing
  factor A- •'~ . This dimensional argument led Heisenberg, very early to c l assify interactions
  according to the dimensionality of their coupling canstants, and to suggest . .. that new effects
  might arise at energies of order gas for instance at the energy G f 1 ` 2 . 300 GeV, where GF.
  is the four-fermion coupling constant of the Fermi beta decay lheary . After the development of
  renormaliration theory it was noted by Sokoto et al . 1 3 that the non-renarmaliza6le theories are
  those whose coupling constants have negative dimensionality .
520                 1 2 General R enorma liaatiorz Theory

    For instance, the leading non-renormalizable corrections to the conven-
tional electrodynamics of electrons or moons would be those interactions
of dimension 5, which are suppressed by only one factor of 11M . There is
just one such interaction allowed by Lorentz, gauge, and CP invariance,
a Pauli term of ❑ rder (ie/ 2M) i~ [y p , MW F . According to Eqs . (10,6.24),
( 10.6. 17), and (1 0.6 .19) , such a term would contribute an amount of order
4elM to the magnetic moment of the electron or muon . The calculated
value of the magnetic moment of the electron agrees with experiment
to within terms of order 10-"4eJ2rra,, so M must be greater than about
8x101°m, =4x10 7 GeV.
   This limit may be weakened if other symmetries restrict the form
of the non-renormalizable interaction. For instance, the conventional
Lagrangian of quantum electrodynamics is invariant under a chiral trans-
formation V -+ y 5ya, except for a change ❑f sign of the fermion mass term
-rrt~;ip . If we assume that the full Lagrangian is invariant under a formal
symmetry W --+ 7s 1P, M " -rra, then a Pauli term in the Lagranglan would
have to appear with an extra factor m f , so that its contribution to the
magnetic moment would be only of order 4em/ 2 . Because of the extra
factor of in, here it is the moan rather than the electron that provides the
most useful limit on M . The calculated value of the magnetic moment of
the moon agrees with experiment to within terms of order 10-$e/2m, so
M must be greater than about $ x I 01 nai, = 3 x 103 GeV. In any case, if
M is anywhere near as large as 10 " GeV, then we are certainly justified
in neglecting any non-renormalizable interactions that might appear in
quantum electrodynamics .
   These considerations help us to cope with some of the puzzles associated
with higher-derivative terms in the Lagrangian . For instance, in the
general theory of a real scalar field 0 , we would expect to find terms in
the Lagrangian density of the form 0O110. Any one such term would make
a direct contribution to the scalar self-energy function II*(q') proportional
to (q')n . If we were to include this contribution to all orders, but ignore
all other effects of non-renormalizabie interactions, then the propagator
❑'(q ') = 11 ( q' + m' - II*(q2)) would not have the simple pole in q2 at
negative q2 expected from the general arguments of Section 10.7, but n
such poles (some of which may coincide), generally at complex values of
q2. But if the non-renormalizable term 0 ❑ n 0 has a coefficient of order
    -2(n-l), where M m, then the extra poles are at q2 of order M2 , where
it is illegitimate to ignore the infinite number of other non-renormalizable
interactions that must also appear in the Lagrangian . Thus the appearance
of higher-derivative terms in a general non-renormalizable Lagrangian is
not in conflict with the general principles underlying quantum field theory
that were used in Section 1 0.7. But by the same token, we also cannot
use higher-derivative terms to avoid ultraviolet divergences altogether, as
                    1 2.3 Is Reraormaliaabitity Necessary?               52 1

has been repeatedly proposed . A term f-2(',-1)00n0 in the Lagrangian
density provides a cutoff at momenta q2 M2, but at these momenta we
cannot ignore all the other non-renarmalizable interactions that must be
present.
   Although highly suppressed, non-renormalizable interactions may be
detectable if they have effects that would otherwise be forbidden . For
instance, we will see in section 12 .5 that the symmetries of charge-con-
jugation and space-inve rsion invariance are an automatic consequence of
 the structure of the electromagnetic interactions that is imposed by gauge
invariance, Lorentz invariance, and renormalizabi lity, but we can easily
imagine non-renormalizable terms that would violate these symmetries,
such as an electron electric d ipole moment term FpTs t7p , Yw] tp F~'', or
the Fermi xnteractivn Ys~~ VTp Y ,uW . It is widely believed today that the
conservation of baryon and lepton number is violated by very small effects
of highly supp ressed non-renormalizable interactions. Another example
of a detectable non-renormalizable interac t ion is provided by gravitation .
As mentioned before, gravitons have no renarmalizable interactions at all .
But, of course, we detect gravi tation, because it has the special property
that the gravitational fields of all the particles in a macroscopic body add
up coherently.
   Although non-renormalizable theories involve an infinite number of
free parameters, they retain considerable p red ictive power : 12 they allow
us to calculate the non-analytic parts of Feynman amplitudes, like the In q
and q In q terms in the one-dimensional examples at the beginn ing of the
previous section. Such calculations just reproduce the results required by
the axiom of S-matrix theory, that the S-matrix has ❑nly those singularities
r equired by unitarity .
   Paradoxically, it is just in the case where symmetry principles forbid
renormalizable interactions that non- renarrnalizable quantum field theo-
ries prove the most useful . In such cases we can derive a useful perturba-
tion theory by expanding in powers of k1M. Thi s has been worked out
in detail for the theory of low-energy pions,12,13 to be discussed in detail
in volume II, and t he theory of low-energy gravitons.14 For a s impler
example, consider the theory of a real scalar field, satisfying the principle
of invariance under the field translatio n

                              OW -f     (x} + e

with iF an arbitrary constant. This symmetry forbids and renormalizable
interactions or scalar mass, but it allows an infinite number of non-
renQt-amalizable derivative interactions
522 12 General Renormalization Theory

where g ~ M -4, and ` . . .' denotes terms with more derivatives or fields .
(For simplicity, it is assumed here that the theory also has a symmetry
under the reflection According to the above dimensional anal-
ysis, the graph for a general reaction in which all energies and momenta
are of order k < M is suppressed b y a factor (k/ 1) ' , where


                                    i               i

with rt; and di the numbers of scalar fields and derivatives in an interaction
of type i, and Vj the number of vertices for these interactions in our graph .
For k       1, the dominant contributions to any process are those with the
smallest value of v . The formula for v can be put in a more useful form
by using the familiar topological identities for a connected graph :
                      Yt = I - L. + 1 , Vjnj = 21 + E ,

where 1, E, and L are the numbers of internal lines, external lines, and
loops in our graph . Comb ining these relations gives



Now, the field translation symmetry requires that every field must be
accompanied with at least one derivative, so the quantity d i -ray as well
as L is non-negative for all interactions. Thus for a given process (that
is, a fixed ❑ umber E of external lines) the dominant terms will be those
constructed solely from tree graphs (i.e., L = 0 ), and interactions with
the minimum number di = nj of derivatives . That is, in leading, order we
can take the Lagrangian density to depend only on . rst derivatives of the
field . Higher-order corrections may involve loops and/or interactions with
more derivatives on some fields . But to any given order v in k f FYI, we need
only consider a finite number of graphs, those with L < (4 - 2E + v) /4,
and only a finite number of interaction types .
   For instance, scalar scalar scattering is given in leading order by the
one-vertex tree graph calculated using the interaction --g( O-yOa'10)2 in first
order. According to our formula for v, the leading correction, suppressed
at low energy by a factor (k IM ) 2 , arises from another single-vertex tree
graph, produced by an interaction with two additional derivatives of the
farm** Op c?, 0 0P6 406~O . The next corrections, suppressed at low en-
ergy by two further factors of k f 11rI, arise both from the one-loop diagram
of Figure 12.4 (including permutations of external lines), calculated us-
ing only the interaction - g ( Op Oc po)2 , and also from tree graphs with


  In accordance with the remarks of Section 7 .7, we are excluding interactions involving 00,
  because the field equation for 0 can b e used to express such interactions in terms of the oihers .
                         12.3 Is R enorrraa lizabi l i ty Necessary "                           523

                                      \    { F \  J
                                       f
                                       1 ~ `!xfti

                                                         r ~
                                  r                            t
                                                               i
                                  {                 t              i



Figure 12 .4. One-l oo p diagram for scalar -scalar sca t terin g in the theory with
derivative quad rili-near interactions .


a single vertex arising from a quartic interaction with eight derivatives,
whose couplings contain infinite parts that cancel the ultraviolet diver-
gence from the loop graph .t The loop graph also yields finite terms in
the scattering amplitude proportional to terms like S4 In s + t4 In t + U4 In u,
s2t2 It, u + t2u2 In s + U ' S2 In t, etc., with calculable coefficients proportional
to g 2 . These finite terms simply represent the correction to the lowest-order
scattering amplitude needed to ensure the unitarity of the S-matrix, but
perturbative quantum field theory is by far the easiest way of calculating
them .
   Although non-renorrnalizable theories can provide useful expansions in
powers of energy, they inevitably lose all predictive power at energies of
the order of the common mass scale M that characterizes the various
couplings . If eve were to take these expansions literally, the results for
S-matrix elements would violate unitarity bounds for E                    There
seem to be just two possibilities about what happens at such energies .
One is that the growing strength of the effects of the non-renormalizable
couplings somehow saturates, avoiding any conflict with unitarity .15 The
other is that new physics of some sort enters at the scale M . In this case,
the non-renormalizable theories that describe nature at energies E < Al
are just e ffective ,field theories rather than truly fundamental theories .
   Probably the earliest example of an effective field theory was derived
in the 1930s b y Euler et al .,16 as a theory of low-energy photon-photon
interactions . {fee Section ] .3. ) In effect, they calculated the contribution
to photon-photon scattering of Feynman diagrams such as Figure 12 .5,
and found that at energies much less than in, the scattering of light by
light was the same as would be calculated with an effective Lagrangia n

                                   2.2
                                         24   [(E 2 - B 2)2 + 7(E ~ B)2
                                          e
                                                    eE eB
                                  + higher orders in 2 &
                                                    me   me


 These are the only ultraviolet divergences encountered in one-loop graphs if we ase dimensional
 regularization . For other methods of regularization there are also q U iIC tYC and quadratic di-
 vergences, which are cancelled by counterterms in the four-scalar interac t ions with four or six
 d erivatives .
524                  1 2 General Rennrmal azation Theory




Figure 12 .5 . Diagram for photon-photon scattering, whose effect at low energy
can be calculated from the effective Lagrangian of Euler et a1. " Straight lines are
electrons ; wavy lines are photons .


Euler et u!. used this effective La rangian only in the tree approximation,
to calculate the leading terms in photon interaction matrix elements . It was
not until much liter that such Lagrangians, though non-renormalizable,
were used beyond the tree appraximation .12,1 7
   In modern jargon, we say that in deriving this Lagrangian the electron
is `integrated out', because in the one-loop approximation we hav e

  exp i        ,.,(E, B)d4X)         11 dy,(x) exp          YQE n (We, A)d x
                                                      (i
A more general procedure is simply to write down the most general non-
renormalizable effective Lagrangian, use it to calculate various amplitudes
as an expansion in energies and momenta, and then choose the constants
in the effective Lagrangian by matching the results it gives for these
amplitudes to those derived from the underlying theory .
   We will encounter effective field theories again, especially in considering
broken symmetries in Volume II . As we shall see, effective field theories
are useful even where they cannot be derived from an underlying theory,
either because the theory is unknown, or because its interactions are
too strong to allow the use of perturbation theory . Indeed, even if we
knew nothing about the properties of charged particles, the scattering
of photons at sufficiently low energy would have to be described by an
effective Lagrangian consisting of the terms ( E2 -B 2)2 and (E • B)2, because
these are the unique quartic Lorentz- and gauge-invariant terms with no
derivatives acting on E and B . Terms with such derivatives would be
suppressed at low photon energies E by additional factors of E/M, wher e
  f is some typical mass of the charged particles that are being integrated
out. We can go further : we shall see that effective field theories are
useful even where the light particles they describe are not present in the
underlying theory at all, but composites of the heavy particles that are
                               1 2.4 The Floating Cutoff                                   525

integrated out. The und e rlyin g theory might not even be a field theory at
all - the problem of incorporating gravitation has led many t heorists to
bel ieve that, in fact, it is a string theory. But wherever an effective field
theory comes from, it is inevitably a non-renormal izable theory .


                           12.4 The Floating Cutoff`

Before closing this chapter, it is worth commenting on the relation be-
tween conventional renarmalization theory and an approach pioneered
by Wilson? In Wilson's method one imposes a 'floating' finite ultraviolet
cut-off (either sharp or smooth) at momenta with components of order A,
and instead of taking A -y ao, one requires that the bare constants of the
theory (those appearing in the Lagrangian) depend on A in such a way
that all observable quantities are 11-independent .
   It is convenient to work with dimensionless parameters . If a bare
coupling or mass parameter gt(11) has dimensionality [mays]°j, we define
the corresponding dimensionless parameter j by


Ordinary dimensional analysis tells us that the value of Sd at one value
At of the cutoff can be expressed as a function of the values of the j at
another value A of the cutoff, and the dimensionless ratio A' /11 :

                              ,~#j(A') = Fj (§(A), A/A) .                             (12.4.2)

Na dimensional parameters other than A' and A can appear in F, because
no ultraviolet or infrared divergences can enter here ; the difference be-
tween the constants at A and at A' arises from diagrams whose internal
lines are restricted to have momenta between A and A'. Differentiating
Eq. (12.4 .2) with respect to A' and then setting A' equal to A yields a
differential equation for

                                  ~~ i(A ) = fl i ff(A) ) 7 (12.4.3 )
where flr( g) = [a/az F& , z)],=j . The functions fl; () may be calculated
for small couplings in perturbation theory . This is Wilson's version of the
`renormalization group' equation, which will be discussed in somewhat
different terms in Volume H .
   The Lagrangian for and finite value of the cutoff defines an effective
field theory, in which instead of (or in addition to) integrating out `heavy '

 This section lies somewhat out of the book's main line of development, and may be omitted in
 a first reading .
526                        12 General Renormalization Theor y

particles like the electron in the work of Euler et a l ., one integrates out all
particles with momenta greater than A. Even if one starts with a theory
with a finite number of coupling parameters lr~' at some cutoff A 0, at any
other value of the cutoff the differential equation (12 .4,3) will generally
yield non-zero values for all couplings allowed by symmetry principle .* '
   We now distinguish between the renormalizable and unrenormalizable
couplings, labelled ,, and respectively, with a running over the finite
number N of couplings (including masses) for which ❑a >_ 0, and n running
over the infinite number of couplings with dimensionalities A, < 0. We
want to show that if the couplings 1a(Ao) and ,(Ao) at some initial
cutoff'value A0 lie on a generic N-dimensional initial surface Yo, then
(with some qualifications) for A < A0 they will approach a fixed surface
51" that is independent of both A0 and the initial surface .' This fixed
surface is stable, in the sense that from and point on the surface, the
trajectory generated by Eq . (12 .4.3) stays on the surface . Such a stable
surface defines a finite-parameter set of theories whose physical content is
cutoff-independent, which as argued in the previous section, is the essential
property of renormalizable theories . Furthermore, this construction shows
that a generic theory defined with cutoff A0 will look for A A0 like a
renormalizable theary . 4
   To prove these results, consider and small perturbation &'0i(A) in the
values of the 1 j{ }satisfying Eq . (12 .4.3) . It will satisfy the differentia l
equatio n

                                                                                                (12 .4 .4)

where
                                                 a
                                      Mjj0v) =_ awj fliff)                                      ( 12.4.5

This equation couples the re n ortnalizable and unrenor maliz a ble couplings,
making it difficult to see the difference in their behavior . To decouple them ,
we introduce the linear comb inations

                                                                                                (12.4.6)



"The only known exceptions lcti this rule are in theories based au supeFSymmetry ¢
t This theorem is due to Palchinski .19 What follows here is a shortened and less rigorous version .
   In Polchinski's proof, the initial surface is taken to he that with all non-renormalicablc couplings
  vanishing. As we shall we here, the couplings approach the same fixed surface for generic initial
  surfaces .)
  Of course some theories have symmetries and a field content that do not allow any renormalizable
  interactions . This is the case for theories containing only fermion fields, or only the gravitational
  field . Such theories lor A ~ R0 look like free-field theories.
                          12.4 The Floating Cutqff                         52 7

where S ° are the values of the renormalizable couplings at cutoff 11 O ,
which we shall use as coordinates for the initial surface, and IV, are the
values of the non-renormalizable couplings at cutoff A derived from the
differential equation (12.4 .3), with initial value for Ao at the point on
the initial surface with coordinates rya . To calculate the derivative of ~„
with respect to A , we note that the derivatives 04~ 10-S satisfy the same
differential equation (12.4.4) as the It is an elementary exercise then
to show tha t

                                  ~,: NMI ~m                          (12 .4.7 )
                             d
where
                                                     -i
                                        Wn J G
                                        0170
                                                                      (12 .4.8 )
                                      01§a   (aoo MhM -
                                   ab

Now we must estimate the elements of ,,, . For a free-field theory no
cutoff is needed, so for very small coupling all bare parameters gi(A)
become A-independent . Hence for small couplings the dimensionless
parameters ~# z simply scale as A-A~ , and the matrix Mj .j is given by


It follows that the matrix 1V., is given approximately by --d ,6 ,... . The
defining characteristic of the non-renormalizable couplings is that ❑ , < 0,
so Eq. (12.4.7) tells us that, at least for couplings in some finite range,
where Nnm is positive-definite, the , decay for A < AO like positive
powers of A /11o . In this limit, then, the perturbations are related by

                                                          b          (12.4.10)
                                 ab u    ~'`•~~ ~~
I n particular, if we make a small change in the initial surface Yo and/or
the starting point on that surface and/or the initial cutoff AO, such that the
perturbations M%,, in the renormalizable couplings vanish at some cutoff
A < A0 , then the perturbations in all the other couplings at cutoff
A also vanish . Thus the non-renormalizable couplings n (11 ) for A < 11o
can depend only on the renormalizable couplings W a{ A }, not separately
on the initial surface or the starting point on that surface or the initial
cutoff A0 . At cutoff A       AO all the couplings therefore approach an
N-dimensional surface Y, with coordinates a( A) , which is independent
of both the initial surface and of A0 . Note that the non-renormalizable
couplings S„ are not generally small on Y ; the important point is that
they become functions of the renormalizable couplings . Changes in A
with A remaining much less than A O will change the couplings, but the
couplings will remain close to Y (at least as long as the couplings do not
528                 1 2 General R eno rmalizattan Theory

 become so large that 21 T,,, is no longer a positive-definite matrix). Hence
 Y is a stable surface, as was to b e proved .
   We have seen that all physical quantities may be expres sed in terms of
 A and the ' %,,(A), and are A-inde pendent. This is true in part icular of
 the N conventional re-normalized coupli ngs and masses, like e and m, in
 quantum electrodynamics . But we can then invert t his relation, and express
 the §n( A ) in terms o f the co nventional parameters and A. In this way
 we can justify the usual renormalization program : all physical quantities
 are expressed in acutoff- i ndependent way in terms of the conventional
 renormalized couplings and masses .
   The Wilson approach has some advantages in practice. One does not
 have to worry about subintegrations and overlapping divergences ; the
momentum cutoff applies to all internal lines . Also, some of the non-
renormalization theorems of s upersymmetry theory, which tell us that
certain couplings are not affected by rad iative corrections, work only for
the cutoff-dependent bare couplings . 20
   O n the other hand , there are disadvantages to the Wilson approach .
One must give up the special simplicities of work ing with renormalizable
theories like g u antum, electrodynamics ; once one starts integrating out
particle s with momenta above some scale A, the resulting effective field
theory will contain all Lorentz- and gauge-invariant interactions , with
A-dependent couplings . (Nevertheless, in physical processes at energies
E < A, the dominant couplings will still be the renormalizable ones.)
Also, the cutoff generally des troys man ifest gauge invariance, and either
manifest Lorentz invariance or unitarity. None of this is a problem
in condensed matter physics, the original context of Wilson's approach,
because no one would expect a realistic condensed matter theory to be
strictly xenormalizab ie, and there are no fundamental physical principles
that are necessari ly violated by a cutoff. In fact, in crystals there is a
cutoff on phonon momenta, pro vided by the inverse lattice spacing.
   At bottom, the difference between the conventi onal and t he Wilson
approach i s one of m athematical conve nience rather than ❑ f physical
interpretation. Indeed, conventional renormalization already provides a
sort of adj ustable cutoff ; w he n we express our answer in terms of coupling
constants that are defined as the values of phy sical amplitudes at some
m omenta of order M (as for the scalar field theory di scussed in the previous
section), the cancellations that make integrals converge begin to operate
at virtual momenta of order ,u . Conversely, the A -dependent coupling
constants of the Wilson approach must ultimately b e expressed in terms
of observable masses and charges, and when this is done the results are,
of course, the same as those obtained b y conventional means.
                                1 2.5 Accidental Symmetries                                         529

                              12.5     Accidental Symrn etries*

In Section 12 .3 we saw that there are good reasons to adopt renormaliz-
a61e field theories as approximate descriptions of nature at sufficiently low
energy. It often happens that condition of renormalizability is so stringent
that the effective Lagrangian automatically obeys one or more symmetries,
which are not symmetries of the underlying theory, and may therefore
violated by the suppressed non-renarmalizable terms in the effective La-
grangian . Indeed, most of the experimentally discovered symmetries of
elementary particle physics are `accidental symmetries' of this sort .
   A classic example is provided by the inversions and flavor conservation
in the electrodynamics of charged leptons . The most general renormal-
izable and gauge- and Lorentz-invariant Lagrangian density for photons
and fields tpi of spin ~ and charge -e takes the for m




                      R                 f         ~~
                 -~           ij~,~IW x,~ - E 1 ~t i ~. f                 (12 . 5 .1)


where i, j are summed over the three lepton flavors (e, p , and T), ~iL and
~i,R are the left- and right-handed parts of the field Wj, defined by

                    V !-a =    2 G + Y S h) i , 1P Ri =           120   - Y 5 )Vi n           (12 .5 .2)
and ZL, ZR, and M are numerical matrices . We are not assuming anything
about lepton flavor conservation, so the matrices ZLij , ZRij and Mij need
not be diagonal . Also we are not assuming anything about invariance
under P, C, or T invariance, so there is no necessary relation between ZL
and ZR, or between M and Mt . The only constraints on these matrices
come from the reality of the Lagrangian density, which requires that
ZL jj and ZRj} are Hermitian, and from the canonical anticommutation
relations, which require that ZL;j and ZRj are positive-definite .
   Now suppose we replace the lepton fields yap,, ~Rwith new fields V L',
~~ defined by

                          TL = SLW i j tPR = SRT x a (12.5.3 )

where SL,R are non-singular matrices that can be chosen a s we like . The
Lagrangian density when expre ssed in term s o f these new fields then takes


 Thi s sectio n l ies somewhat o ut of the boo k 's main l ine of development, and may be om i tted in
 a first readin g.
530                      1 2 General Renormalization weary

the same form as in Eq . (12.5 .1), but with new matrice s


We can choose SL and SR so that Z~, = Z~ = 1 . (Take ~'~,,~ _ ~TL, RD ~,, R >
where UL,Rare the unitary matrices that diagonalize the positive-definite
Hermitian matrices ZL R, and the DLY are the diagonal matrices whose
elements are the inverse square roots of the eigenvalues of ZL,R .)
   Now make another transformation, to lepton fields w' defined b y
                                                                                           (12.5.5 )
The Lagrangian density again takes the same form when expressed in
terms of these new fields, with new matrice s
         z L = S~f S~ ,          Z
                                     ~ = ~ s~ , f" = S~ ~ . {12. 5 .6}
This time we take S{ . R unitary, so that again Z L' = Z~ - 1 . We choose
these unitary matrices so that M" is real and diagonal. ( By the polar
decomposition principle, M' like any square matrix may be put in the
form ' = VH, where V is unitary and H is Hermitian . Take S~, = S~ Vt
and choose SR' as the unitary matrix that diagonalizes H .) Dropping
primes, the Lagrangian density now takes the for m
                 iz3Fvj1" -I:


                   iV~ Li V R f             N- Ri W Lr                                    ( I 2 .J . 7 )
                  i          i

where rtai are real numbers, the eigenvalues of the Hermitian matrix H .
Finally, t his can be put in the more famil iar form


                                       r                           i

With the Lagrangian taking this form, it is now apparent that any renor-
maliza6le Lagrangian for lepton electrodynamics automatically conserves
P, C, and T, as well as the numbers of leptons (minus the numbers of
antileptons) of each flavor : electron, muon, and tauon .*` In particular,
despite the appearance of E q . (12 .5.1), this theory does not allow such
processes as it -} e +y . The reader may perhaps worry whether it is correct
to identify the lepton fields as the ip r (previously called W") appearing in
Eq, (12.5,8 ) , which obviously conserves lepton flavor, rather than the V)j
appearing in Eq . (12.5 . 1) , which seems to allow processes like p --* e + y .


 This was first shown by Feinberg, Kabir, and myself 21 F'einberg2= had earlier noted that weak
 interaction effects in a theory with only one neutrino species would give rise to an observable
 rate for the pr[rcecs p - e + y, a difficulty that was only resolved by the discovery of a second
 neulrint) species .
                                  Problems                                 53 1

Such worries may be put aside ; as stressed in Section 10 . 3 , there is no one
field that can be identified as the field of the electron or muon . In fact,
although Eq. (12 .5 .1) yields a nnn-vanishing matrix element for radiative
decay of lepton 1 into lepton 2 off the lepton mass shell, by taking the
lepton momenta on the mass shell we find a vanishing S-matrix for all
such processes even when calculated using Eq . (12.5 .1) .
   It was essential in deriving these results that the same electric charge
appeared in Eq. (12 .5.1) for both the left- and right-handed parts of the
lepton fields or, in other words, that both left- and right-handed parts of
the lepton fields transform in the same way under electromagnetic gauge
transformations . As we shall see in Volume II, for similar reasons the
modern renormalizable theory of strong interactions known as quantum
chromodynamics automatically conserves C, and (aside from certain non-
perturbative effects) P and T, as well as the numbers of quarks (minus
the numbers of antiquarks) of each quark flavor . We shall also see in
Volume 11 that the simplest version of the renormalizable standard model
of weak and electromagnetic interactions automatically conserves lepton
flavor (though not C and P) for reasons similar to those described here for
electrodynamics. It remains an open possibility that non-renormalizable
interactions arising from higher mass scales may violate any of these
conservation iaws .



                                  Problems

   1 . List all the renorrnalizable (or superrenorrnalizable) Lorentz-
       invariant terms in the Lagrangian of a single scalar field for space-
       time dimensionalities 2, 3, and 6.

   2 . Show how t he ove rl apping divergence in the e l ect ron self-energy is
       cance lled in quantum elect rodynamics .

   3 . C onsider the theory of a scalar field 0 and spinor field tp, with
       interaction Ham iltonian g V)yr . W rite the one-loop part of the scalar
       self-energy function II' (q) as a divergent polynomial in p + , plus an
       explicit convergent integral .

   4. Suppose that the quantum electrodynamics of electrons and photon s
      is actually an effective field theory, derived by integrating out un -
      known particles of mass M > m, Assume gauge invariance an d
      Lorentz invariance, but not invariance under C , P, or T . What are
      the non-renormalizable terms in the Lagrangian of leading order i n
      11M ? Of next to leading order''
532                 1 2 General Renormalizarion Theory

                                 References

  1 . F. J. Dyson, Phys . Rev. 75, 4$6, 1736 (1949). A historical perspective is
      provided by Ren o rmalizarion, ed . by L . M . Brow(Springer-Verlag,
      New York, 1993). For a comprehensive modern treatment, see J.
      Collins, Renormalization (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
      1984) .

  2. S. Weinberg Pays . Rep. 118, 838 (1959) . This proof relied only o n
     general asymptoti c properties of the integrands of Feynman graph s
     in Euclidean momentum space, obtained by dick rotation of al l
     integration contours . The proof was simplified through the use of
     more detailed properties of the integrand, by Y. Hahn and W. Zim-
     merman, Commun. Math. Pays. 1 0, 330 (1968), and then extended t o
     Minkowskjan momentum space by W . Zimmerman, Commun. Mat h .
     Phys. 11 , 1 (068).

  3. J. D . Bjorken and S . D. Drell, Relativistic Quantum Fields (McGraw-
     Hill, New York, 1 9 65 ) : Sections    10 and 19 .11 .

  4 . See, e.g,, J. Ness and J . Bagger, Supersymmetry and Supergravity
      (Princeton University Press, Princeton, 1 953), and original references
      quoted therein .

  5. A. Salam, Phys. Rev. 82, 217 ( X951 ) ; Phys. Rev. 84, 426 ( 1951 ). ; R T.
     Matthews and A . Salam, Phys . Rev . 94, 185 (1954).
  6. N. N. Bogoliubov and D. Parasluk, Arta Math. 97, 227 (1957)
  7. K . Hepp, Comm . Math. Ph i. 2, 301 ( 19 66), Hepp remarks that `it is
     difficult to find two theorists whose understanding of the essential
     steps of the proof [of Bogoliubov and Parasiuk] is isomorphic,' but
     Hepp's paper is itself not easy to read .

  S. W. Zimmerman, Comm. Math. Phys. 15, 2 08 ( 1969) . Also see
     Timmerman, in lectures on Elementary Particles and Quantum Field
      Theory - Brandeis Uni v ersity Summer Institute in Theoretical Physics
     ( .I.'F. Press, Cambridge, 1 970).

  9. W. Heisenberg, Z. Physik 11 0, 251 (1938) .

 10. W. HeisenbergRef. 6 and Z. Physik 113, 61 ( 1939 ) .
11 . S. Takata, H . Umezawa, and S. Kamefuchi, Prog, Theor. Pays, 7, 327
     (1952) .

12. S. Weinberg, Physica 96A, 327 (1 979)
                                   R~f8 re 1Z CBS                               533

1 3. J. Gasser and H . I,eutwyler, Ann. Whys. (NY) 158, 142 (1984) ; Nucl.
     Pays. B250, 465 (1985).

1 4. J. F. Donoghue, Pays. Rev. D 50, 3874 (1994).
15 . One possible way that this can happen is through the phenomenon
     of 'asymptotic safety' ; see S. Weinberg, in General Relativity - An
     Einstein Cente nary Su rvey, ed. by S. Hawking and W. Israel
     (Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 1979) : Section 16.3.

16. H . Euler and B . Kockel, Na turwiss. 23, 246 (1935) ; W. Heisenberg
    and H. Euler, Z. Physik 98, 714 (1936) .

17. The Euier et al. effective Lagrangian has been used in one-loop
    calculations by J . Halter, Phys. Lett. B 31 6 , 1 55 (1993).
18. K. G. Wilson, Pays. Rev . B4, 3174, 3184 (1971) ; Rev. Mod. Phys. 47,
    773 (1975) .

19. J. Polchinski, Nucl. Whys. B231, 269 (1984) ; lecture in Recent Direc-
    tions in Particle Theory - Proceedings of the 1 992 TASI Conference,
    ed. by J. Harvey and J . Polchinski (World Scientifi c, Singapore, 1993) :
    p . 235 .

20. Novikov, A . Shifman, A . I. Vainshtein, and V I . Zakharov,
    Nuc2. Pays. B229, 381 (1983) ; Y . A. Shifman and A . I . Vainshtein,
    Nucl. Phys. B277, 456 (1986) ; and references quoted therein . See also
    M. A. Shifman and A. I . Vainshtein, Nucl. Fhys. B359 , 571 (1991) .

21 . G. Feinberg, P. Ka bir, and S. We i n b erg, Ph ys. R ev. Lett. 3, 527 ( 1959).
22. G. Feinberg, Whys. Rev . 11 0, 1482 (1958) .
