MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                           Part III

Tuesday 4 June 2002    1.30 to 3.30




                               PAPER 75


            EARLY UNIVERSE COSMOLOGY




                          Attempt TWO questions
                      There are four questions in total
                      The questions carry equal weight




          You may not start to read the questions
           printed on the subsequent pages until
           instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                            2


1 (a) In either Newtonian or synchronous gauge, write down the Sachs-Wolfe equation
describing the linear sources of microwave anisotropies. Explain the physical significance
of each term and describe how each changes with angle, θ, for scale invariant primordial
fluctuations.
  (b) Some primordial theories, such as inflation, predict coherent, adiabatic perturba-
tions which give rise to so-called ‘Doppler peaks’ in the CMB power spectrum. Describe
the origin of the first three peaks and calculate the spacing between the peaks.
   (c) Describe two effects which suppress small scale power and show how they scale as
a function of wave number, k.
  (d) Explain the origin of CMB polarization. How large is it compared to the CMB
anisotropy? Explain why the peaks in the polarization power spectrum are shifted with
respect to the anisotropy peaks.
  (e) Microwave background fluctuations can also be created in the low redshift universe
by non-linear effects. Give three such non-linear contributions and describe the physical
origin and frequency spectrum of each.
  (f ) Describe two sources, galactic or extra-galactic, of foregrounds for the CMB. For
which frequencies does each dominate over the CMB anisotropies?




                                                                                Paper 75
                                                     3


2      The Boltzmann equation is most naturally described in terms of the conformal
position, xi , and its canonical momentum, p̃i = mgiν dxν /ds. In these variables, the
number of particles in a given element of phase space is given by dN = f (t, x, p̃) d3 xd3 p̃.
        It is useful to define an alternative momentum, pi , which obeys the standard
Minkowski space relation between momentum and energy, p20 = p2 + m2 . This has
comoving momentum, q, and direction vectors, ni , given by pi = pi ≡ aqni , where a
is the scale factor. In these variables, the collisionless Boltzmann equation is given by

                            ∂f  ∂f dxi   ∂f dq   ∂f dni
                               + i     +       +        = 0.
                            ∂t  ∂x dt    ∂q dt   ∂ni dt

  (a) For small perturbations, the distribution function can be decomposed into a uniform
piece and a first order perturbation: f = f0 +f1 . What is the leading order (0th , 1st , 2nd , ...)
of each of factors in the above equation. Use these considerations to write the first order
Boltzmann equation for f1 .
  (b) In Fourier space, the scalar piece of the metric perturbation can be written as

                                 hij = 13 δij h + (k̂i k̂j − 13 δij )hS .

Using this decomposition and the geodesic equations,

                                            dp̃ν  1
                                      p̃0        = gαβ,ν p̃α p̃β ,
                                             dt   2
rewrite the collisionless Boltmann equation for massless photons to show

                                                 2 0
                              ∆0 + ikµ∆ =          (h − h0S ) + 2µ2 h0S .
                                                 3
                              −1
Here, ∆(k, µ, τ ) ≡ −4f1 q ∂f
                           ∂q
                             0
                                   , µ ≡ k̂ · n̂ and primes denote derivatives with respect
to comoving time, dτ = dt/a.
  (c) In the matter dominated regime, h = hS + C = 41 Ak 1/2 τ 2 , where A and C are
constants. If the distribution function immediately after last scattering was given by
∆(τLS ), solve for the distribution function today. Which term dominates the large angle
anisotropies?




Paper 75                                                                        [TURN OVER
                                              4


3 (a) Sketch a Penrose-Carter diagram for maximally extended anti de Sitter space and
label all the infinities present in the diagram.
  (b) Define what it means for a spacetime to be globally hyperbolic. (A qualitatative,
physical definition suffices here).
    (c) Is maximally extended anti de Sitter space globally hyperbolic? Why or why not?
  (d) Copy the diagram from part (a) and place an arbitrary point P in AdS inside the
diagram. Sketch the family of all timelike geodesics passing through P.
  (e) Copy the diagram from part (a) again and indicate on your conformal diagram the
region covered by the Randall-Sundrum coordinates endowed with the line element

                   ds2 = dy 2 + exp(−2y) −dt2 + dx1 2 + dx2 2 + dx3 2 .
                                                                    
                                                                                         (∗)

[Assume that the x1 , x2 , and x3 directions are perpendicular to the page.]
  (f ) Compute the trajectory of the most general timelike geodesic using the metric (∗).
Parameterize the trajectory in terms of the proper time. Compute the acceleration of the
surface defined by y = 0.



4       Consider the two following scenarios for a universe with large extra dimensions.
   (i) Suppose that we live on a (3+1)-dimensional braneworld of the kind in the infinite
Randall-Sundrum scenario—that is, there is a large extra “fifth” dimension y for which
y > 0, with our brane situated at y = 0, a Z2 orbifold symmetry about our brane, and the
line element
                   ds2 = dy 2 + exp(−2y) −dt2 + dx1 2 + dx2 2 + dx3 2
                                                                     

for the five-dimensional bulk that surrounds us.
  (ii) Suppose that we live in a spacetime with N extra spatial dimensions with the
topology (S 1 )N and characteristic size R, so that at low energies all the fields of the
standard model are confined to a (3+1)-dimensional brane but gravity explores the full
(N + 3) + 1 dimensional spacetime.
       Please write a brief essay listing and explaining as many different ways as possible
for detecting observationally or experimentally the presence of extra dimensions for both
scenarios. Your answer does not require any detailed mathematical derivations, nor specific
formulae. However, you should explain as clearly as possible the physics underlying each
of these tests in a qualitative manner. For the first scenario consider the generalization to
an expanding universe and its observational consequences as well.




                                                                                   Paper 75
