MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                          Part III

Monday 3 June 2002    9 to 12




                                PAPER 73


                          BLACK HOLES




                       Attempt THREE questions
                     There are four questions in total
                     The questions carry equal weight




         You may not start to read the questions
          printed on the subsequent pages until
          instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                               2


1      A scalar field φ obeys the Klein-Gordon equation

                                    (− + m2 )φ = 0.

In the remote past, and in the distant future, spacetime is static, but is time dependent
in between. Explain how to quantise this theory in a static region of spacetime.
       Positive frequency modes in the far future, p+i , can be written as a superposition
of positive and negative frequency modes in the distant past, p−i and n−i respectively, as
                                       X
                               p+i =        p−j Aji + n−j Bji .
                                        j


Derive a similar expression for negative frequency modes in the far future, n+i .
      Derive an expression for the expectation value of the number operator for the ith
mode in the distant future given that the initial state is the vacuum.
       Discuss briefly the application of this method to black hole particle creation.



2      State and prove the black hole area theorem.
       Two black holes, B1 and B2 of area A1 and A2 collide to form a new black hole,
B3 of area A3 . Give an argument to show that

                                       A3 ≥ A1 + A2 .


       Suppose that two Schwarzschild black holes of equal mass m merge very slowly. In
so doing, they will emit copious amounts of radiation in a complicated time dependent
fashion. Eventually, they will settle down to form a new Schwarzschild black hole of mass
M. Deduce that                                √
                                        M ≥ 2m.

       What is the maximum amount of energy in the radiation?




                                                                                    Paper 73
                                              3


3      In a vacuum asymptotically flat spacetime that admits a complete non-singular
spacelike hypersurface Σ, show that the mass must be positive or zero.
       Show that if the mass is zero, then there must be a spinor  such that

                                         hji ∇j  = 0

where hij is the induced metric on Σ.
       Suppose that in addition that the spacetime is static, deduce that there must be a
spinor that obeys
                                        ∇i  = 0.

       Give an example of such a spacetime.



4     Describe how to construct the Penrose diagram of the Reissner-Nordstrom metric
with Q2 = M 2 .
        Find by appropriate coordinate transformations, starting with the Reissner-
-Nordstrom metric in Schwarzschild-type coordinates, the metric in spatially conformally
flat coordinates, as
                        ds2 = −W 2 dt2 + V 2 (dx2 + dy 2 + dz 2 )
where W and V are functions of x, y and z which are to be determined.
       A clever, but ignorant, physicist asserts that this spacetime does not really contain
a black hole because one can travel an infinite proper distance inwards towards the central
region in a spacelike fashion without encountering either a trapped surface or a singularity.
How would you convince him or her that their views were incorrect and that the black
hole was real?




Paper 73
