MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                           Part III

Friday 4 June, 2004   9 to 12




                                PAPER 57


                           BLACK HOLES




                        Attempt THREE questions.
                      The are four questions in total.
                      The questions carry equal weight.




          You may not start to read the questions
           printed on the subsequent pages until
           instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                              2


1      Write an essay describing the laws of black hole mechanics and their relationship
to the corresponding laws of thermodynamics.



2     Describe the concept of a vierbein in general relativity.
       Describe how to use the vierbein to construct curved spacetime gamma-matrices
given a set of flat space gamma-matrices γ µ .
      Show that
                                     {γa , γb } = 2gab 1,
where gab is the metric tensor, and 1 is the unit 4 × 4 matrix.
      Show that
                                Rabcd γ a γ b γ c γ d = −2R 1,
where Rabcd is the Riemann tensor.
       Suppose that a spinor field ψ obeys the Dirac equation γ a ∇a ψ = 0. Show that ψ
obeys the wave equation
                                         1
                                    ( − R)ψ = 0.
                                         4



3      A three-dimensional spacelike surface Σ, given by f (x) = 0, is embedded in a
four-dimensional spacetime with metric tensor gab . Describe how to construct the second
fundamental form Kab of this surface.
      Derive the Gauss equation for the curvature tensor (3) Rabcd of Σ in terms of the
curvature tensor (4) Rabcd , the metric gab , and the second fundamental form Kab .
      Find an expression for the Ricci scalar (3) R.
       Suppose that the metric gab obeys the vacuum Einstein equations, and the surface
Σ is totally umbilic. Show that (3) R ≥ 0.
      [Hint: A totally umbilic surface is one where the second fundamental form is
proportional to the induced metric on the surface.]




                                                                               Paper 57
                                              3


4      The metric of a spherically symmetric isolated charged gravitating object in five
spacetime dimensions is, in Schwarzschild-like coordinates,

                                    dr2
               ds2 = −V (r)dt2 +         + r2 (dθ2 + sin2 θdφ2 + cos2 θdψ 2 ),
                                   V (r)

where (θ, φ, ψ) are coordinates on a three-sphere, and

                               V (r) = 1 − 2M/r2 + Q2 /r4

where M > 0 is the mass of the object and Q is the charge.
       i) What conditions on Q and M are necessary for this metric to admit horizons?
       ii) If the metric admits horizons, can these horizons ever be degenerate?
       iii) Sketch the Penrose diagram(s) for the spacetime(s) described by this metric.
        iv) Consider the (t, r)-plane. By putting t = iτ , and looking at the geometry of
the (τ, r) plane, describe the nature of the singularity encountered at r0 where V (r0 ) = 0
provided that V 0 (r0 ) 6= 0.
       v) What conditions on τ need to be imposed to remove this singularity?
       vi) Comment on the relationship of your findings to Hawking’s result that black
holes have a non-zero temperature.




Paper 57
