MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                        Part III

Monday 13 June, 2005   9 to 12




                             PAPER 62


                         BLACK HOLES




                       Attempt THREE questions.
                 There are FOUR questions in total.
                   The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                      SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                  None
Treasury Tag
Script paper




          You may not start to read the questions
           printed on the subsequent pages until
           instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                             2


1      Write an essay describing in detail how one constructs the entirety of the spacetime
associated with a single uncharged non-rotating black hole, given as your starting point
the Schwarzschild metric. Describe qualitatively the consequences of allowing the hole to
be electrically charged.



2      A static asymptotically flat black hole spacetime is given by the metric

                                          dr2
                     ds2 = −V (r)dt2 +         + r2 (dθ2 + sin2 θdφ2 ) .
                                         V (r)

       As r → ∞, V (r) → 1 and V (r) > 0 for r > r0 . At r = r0 , V (r) has a simple
zero corresponding to a non-degenerate black hole horizon. By using Euclidean methods,
derive the temperature T of the horizon.
       The surface gravity κ of a black hole is defined by

                                      k a ∇a kb = κkb

evaluated on the horizon, where k a is the time translation Killing vector. Show that

                                        |κ| = 2πT .




3      Sketch a proof of the black hole area theorem.
       Describe the effect, over a long period of time, of Hawking radiation on the geometry
of a uncharged non-rotating black hole and the physical consequences of this radiation.
       How does the mass of an uncharged, non-rotating black hole evolve as a function
of time?
       Why does your result not contradict the area theorem?




                                                                                  Paper 62
                                              3


4      A black hole is formed by the collapse of a spherically symmetric cloud of pressure-
free matter. Initially the cloud is of uniform density and has a mass equal to that on the
Sun, (1MSun = 2 × 1033 gm) a radius of 100 km, and is at rest.
        What is the metric outside the collapsing matter?
        What is the metric inside the collapsing matter?
        An observer equipped with a stopwatch decides to follow the collapse, and moves
with the outer boundary of the collapsing matter. At approximately what time (in
seconds), according to this observer, does a horizon form? Approximately how much
later (in seconds) according to this observer, does he reach the singularity?
        A second observer watches this process from infinity. When does she see the horizon
form?

        You may use the following approximations:

                                1 Planck mass = 2 × 10−5 gm
                                                                 

                            1 Planck time = 5 × 10−44 sec 
                                                          

                               1 Planck length = 1.6 × 10−33 cm




                                   END OF PAPER




Paper 62
