MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                         Part III

Thursday 9 June, 2005   9 to 12




                              PAPER 74


                  PHYSICAL COSMOLOGY




                        Attempt THREE questions.
                  There are FOUR questions in total.
                    The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                       SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                   None
Treasury Tag
Script paper




          You may not start to read the questions
           printed on the subsequent pages until
           instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                              2


1      (i) The Robertson-Walker metric

                                         dr2
                                                                           
                     2         2    2              2    2      2      2
                                                                        
                 (ds) = (c dt) − a (t)         + r   dθ   + sin  θ dφ
                                       1 − kr2

is the most general metric describing an expanding universe which obeys the Cosmological
Principle. Use this metric to show that the proper area of a spherical surface, centred at
the origin and passing through comoving coordinate r, is 4π[a(t)r]2 .


       (ii) Use the Robertson-Walker metric to show that the cosmological redshift,
z = (νe /ν0 ) − 1, of a light source is related to the scale factor of the universe a(t) by
the relation
                                                a(t0 )
                                        1+z =
                                                a(te )
where ν is the photon frequency, t is time, and the subscripts e and 0 denote respectively
emission and reception.
      Consider two galaxies, A and B. As viewed from Earth, galaxy A is at redshift
zA = 1 and galaxy B is at zB = 3. What is the redshift of galaxy B as measured by a
hypothetical observer on galaxy A?


      (iii) Using the Robertson-Walker metric, show that, for a particle horizon to exist,
the density of the dominant form of mass-energy at early times must scale as ρ ∝ a−α
with α > 2.


        (iv) Hence show that in the radiation-dominated era there was a particle horizon,
and that the proper distance to the horizon as a function of time was shor (t) = 2ct. Give
a brief physical explanation as to why shor (t) > ct, where ct is the distance travelled by a
photon in time t.




                                                                                   Paper 74
                                             3


2    Write an essay entitled: “The Lyman alpha Forest: a Window on the Intergalactic
Medium at High Redshift”.
       Your essay should include points (a), (b), and (c) below, plus at least one of (d),
(e) and (f):
       (a) A description, with an appropriate sketch, of what is meant by the term “Lyman
alpha forest”.
     (b) Why do Lyman alpha forest absorption lines outnumber all other classes of
QSO absorption lines?
       (c) A summary of the main physical characteristics of Lyman alpha clouds. Explain,
using simple physical arguments, why most Lyman alpha clouds are thought to arise in
low density, highly ionised gas.
       (d) A sketch of the distribution of neutral hydrogen column densities, f (NH I , z)
at z ≃ 3. Discuss how f (NH I ) can be used to derive ΩH I , the mass density of neutral
gas expressed as a fraction of the critical density. Is ΩH I greater than, comparable to, or
smaller than Ωbaryons ? Discuss the implications of your answer.
       (e) Does the number of Lyman alpha forest lines evolve with redshift? If so, in what
sense? What redshift-dependent physical processes could cause changes in the Lyman
alpha line density with redshift?
      (f) How does the density of Lyman alpha forest lines change in the immediate
proximity of a quasar? Explain how this effect has been used to constrain the intensity of
the metagalactic ionising background.




Paper 74                                                                  [TURN OVER
                                                        4


3      (i) Show that the amplitude of a linear, super-horizon adiabatic fluctuation increases
with time according to:
                              
                                  t/ti          in the radiation dominated era
                   δ = δi ·
                                  (t/ti )2/3    in the matter dominated era



       (ii) The power spectrum of matter fluctuations, P (k) ≡ h|δk |2 i, can be conveniently
expressed in dimensionless form as:

                                                    V
                                      ∆2 (k) ≡          4πk 3 P (k) .
                                                  (2π)3

Knowing that the correlation function is the Fourier transform of the power spectrum,
show that a scale-free spectrum of primordial fluctuations of the form:

                                                h|δk |2 i ∝ k n

implies a power-law correlation function of the form:
                                                                −γ
                                                            r
                                               ξ(r) =
                                                            r0

with γ = n + 3. What are the values of r0 and γ measured for the present-day correlation
function of galaxies?


       (iii) Sketch the form of P (k) over the range of values of k where its has been
determined, indicating the observations which have contributed to its determination at
the appropriate scales. Briefly describe the main features of P (k) and comment on how
they can be used to measure the cosmological parameters Ωm,0 and Ωbaryons,0 .




                                                                                   Paper 74
                                              5


4     (i) Show that the primordial abundance of helium by mass is
                                                 −1
                                             np
                                  Yp = 2 1 +
                                             nn

where np /nn is the ratio (by number) of protons to neutrons, if all the baryons are in H
and He.


       (ii) Imagine another universe, described by the same cosmological parameters as our
own, but with the one difference that a force of unknown origin accelerated the universal
expansion between times t1 = 1s and t2 = 300s. Would you expect the mass fraction of
hydrogen in this alternate universe to be larger than, smaller than, or the same as, that
in our universe? Justify your answer in two or three sentences.


      (iii) “The observed abundances of the light elements are one of the pillars of the
Big Bang theory: True or False?”
      Your essay should include a discussion of the following points:
      (a) A sketch of how the primordial abundances of the light elements depend on
cosmological parameters. Why do some elements provide better constraints than others?
       (b) How are the abundances of the light elements measured, and their primordial
values deduced? What are (approximately) their primordial values?
      (c) Are the values of the primordial abundances of the light elements as determined
by observation consistent with each other? How do they compare with other independent
measurements of the same cosmological parameters?


                                 END OF PAPER




Paper 74
