MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                           Part III

Friday 9 June, 2006   9 to 12




                                PAPER 63


                           BLACK HOLES




                        Attempt THREE questions.
                 There are FOUR question on this paper.
                      The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                         SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                     None
Treasury Tag
Script paper




          You may not start to read the questions
           printed on the subsequent pages until
           instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                              2


1      What is meant by the concept of a vierbein field in general relativity?
       In what sense is general relativity invariant under Lorentz transformations?
       How does one define a spinor field?
        The covariant derivative of eµa , the vierbein, (a is a curved spacetime index and µ
is a flat Lorentz index) vanishes:
                                           ∇a eµb = 0.
Use this to derive a formula for the spin connection in terms of the Christoffel symbol Γabc ,
the vierbein and its derivatives.
       Suppose the spacetime is conformally flat, so that the metric can be written

                                        gab = Ω2 ηab ,

where Ω is a smooth positive function and ηab is the flat metric on Minkowski space in
Minkowskian coordinates (t, x, y, z). Evaluate the spin connection.
       Hence show, given a flat spacetime constant spinor√ 0 that obeys ∂a 0 = 0 when
written in Minkowskian coordinates (t, x, y, z), that  = Ω0 satisfies the equation
                                                     
                                             1     c
                              γa ∇b + γb ∇a − gab γ ∇c  = 0,
                                             2

where ∇a is the covariant derivative operator for spinors in the metric gab .



2      In five-dimensional spacetime, the analogue of the Schwarzschild metric is
                                       −1
                           2m          2m
                ds2 = − 1 − 2 dt2 + 1 − 2     dr2 + r2 dΩ23 ,             (∗)
                            r           r

where m > 0 is the mass parameter and dΩ23 is the line element on a unit three-sphere
that has proper area 2π 2 .
       Construct the analogue of Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates for this metric.
       Find the analogues of the Eddington-Finkelstein forms of the metric in these
coordinates.
       Use your results to construct the Penrose diagram for this spacetime.
       The mass of the black hole can be evaluated from the Komar integral
                                    Z
                                        ∇a kb dΣab ,
                                        ι0

where k a is the Killing vector associated with time translations. Briefly describe why this
integral should be proportional to the mass. Evaluate this integral for the metric (∗).




                                                                                    Paper 63
                                               3


3      Sketch the derivation of the area theorem for black holes.
      One suggested modification of general relativity involves the introduction of a
cosmological constant Λ, so that the Einstein equations become

                                    1
                               Rab − Rgab + Λgab = 8πTab .
                                    2

       If the energy-momentum tensor of matter obeys the condition Tab pa pb ≥ 0 for
arbitrary future-directed null vectors pa , explain whether or not you would expect the
area theorem to hold.
      A different modification of general relativity is to add matter that involves a
massless scalar field φ that makes a contribution to the energy-momentum tensor of

                                              1
                          Tab = (∂a φ)(∂b φ) − gab (∂c φ)(∂d φ)g cd .
                                              2
Carefully explain whether you would expect the area theorem to hold in this case.



4      A scalar field φ is quantised in a background spacetime metric gab . In the remote
past and the distant future, this metric is time independent. Describe in detail how to use
the idea of Bogoliubov transformations to describe how the state of φ changes between
the remote past and the distant future.
        Suppose that in the remote past the system is in the vacuum state |0− i. Find in
terms of the Bogoliubov coefficients an expression for the expected number of particles
hs|Ns |si created in the state |si as seen in the distant future. Similarly find an expression
for hs|Ns2 |si.
       Sketch how considerations of this type lead to a picture of particle production by
black holes.


                                  END OF PAPER




Paper 63
