MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                          Part III

Monday 4 June 2007    1.30 to 4.30




                              PAPER 63


                          BLACK HOLES




                       Attempt THREE questions.
                 There are FOUR questions in total.
                     The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                        SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                    None
Treasury Tag
Script paper




         You may not start to read the questions
          printed on the subsequent pages until
          instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                                2


1      Starting from the line element ds2 = gab dxa dxb , explain how to find an orthonormal
basis of 1-froms E â . How does one find the connection 1-form, curvature 2-form, Riemann
tensor and Ricci tensor from E â .
       A spherically symmetric static spacetime has line element

                                             dr2
                       ds2 = −V (r) dt2 +         + r2 (dθ2 + sin2 θdφ2 ).
                                            V (r)

       Calculate the curvature 2-form and hence find the components of the Ricci tensor.
       The Einstein equation for a spacetime with a cosmological constant Λ = −3/l2 is

                                               3
                                       Rab = − 2 gab .
                                              l

Find V (r). Explain why the metric you find either has or does not have an event horizon.



2      In string theory, the analogue of the Reissner-Nordstrom black hole of mass M and
charge Q has line element

                  (1 − 2M/r)                   dr2
       ds2 = −                 dt 2
                                    +                         + r2 (dθ2 + sin2 θdφ2 ),
                 (1 − Q2 /M r)        (1 − 2M/r)(1 − Q2 /M r)

where you may assume that Q2 /2M 2 < 1.
       Where is the event horizon?
        Use Euclidean techniques to determine the temperature of the black hole, carefully
justifying your argument by using the fact that eiHt is the quantum mechanical time
translation operator for a system with Hamiltonian H.
      Suppose one has an electrically neutral solar mass black hole, (1M = 2.1033 gm).
Estimate how long, in years, it takes before the black hole can be expected to evaporate
completely.




                                                                                   Paper 63
                                             3


3      A beacon pulses at a time interval M emitting a monochromatic pulse of duration
τ and wavelength λ where λ  τ  M. It starts to fall radially into a Schwarzschild
black hole of mass M starting from rest relative to the hole from r = 8M . (r is the usual
Schwarzschild radial coordinate).
        How long does it take the beacon to reach the horizon?
      An observer at rest relative to the hole and at a very large distance from it watches
the beacon fall in. How many pulses does the observer see?
        What is the approximate observed duration of the last pulse?
        What is the approximate observed frequency of the last pulse?



4     Find the absorbtion cross-section for light by a Reissner-Nordstrom black hole of
mass M and charge Q.
        Check that your answer agrees with the classical result for the Schwarzschild black
hole.
[Hint: You may find it helpful to express your result in terms of M and ψ where

                                           3M sin ψ
                                      Q=     √      .                                     ]
                                               8



                                  END OF PAPER




Paper 63
