MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                          Part III

Monday 4 June 2007    1.30 to 4.30




                              PAPER 67


                 PHYSICAL COSMOLOGY




                       Attempt THREE questions.
                 There are FOUR questions in total.
                     The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                        SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                    None
Treasury Tag
Script paper




         You may not start to read the questions
          printed on the subsequent pages until
          instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                                 2


1     (i) Explain the difference between comoving and physical (proper) coordinates.
Which subtends a larger angle on the sky at redshift z = 3: a transverse distance of 5
proper Mpc or of 5 comoving Mpc? In the small angle approximation, what is the factor
which relates the two angular sizes?
       (ii) From the Friedmann equation
                                  2
                                  ȧ    k   8π      Λ
                                      + 2 =    Gρ +
                                  a    a     3      3

show that, in a Friedmann-Robertson-Walker universe, the scale factor evolves with time
according to the equation:

                                           a3        a2
                                                              
                          ȧ2 = H02 a2 Ωm,0 03 + Ωk,0 20 + ΩΛ,0 ,
                                           a         a

where H is the Hubble parameter, Ωm , Ωk , and ΩΛ are the fractions of the critical density
contributed, respectively, by matter, curvature and the cosmological constant, and the
subscript 0 denotes the present time. You may use natural units, whereby c = 1, and
assume that radiation makes an unimportant contribution to the mass-energy density, i.e.
Ωrad = 0.
      (iii) Hence show that in a universe with a positive cosmological constant, the
expansion rate ȧ reaches a minimum when the scale factor attains the value:
                                                      1/3
                                               Ωm,0
                                  amin =                      a0 .
                                               2ΩΛ,0

        (iv) Derive an expression for ȧ when a = amin in terms of the parameters Ωm,0 , Ωk,0 ,
ΩΛ,0 , H0 , and amin .
       (v) In a flat universe, what is the value of the parameter E(z) ≡ [H(z)/H0 ]2 at the
redshift z where a = amin ?




                                                                                     Paper 67
                                                     3


2      (i) Show that in a flat universe with only matter and a cosmological constant
(Ωk,0 = 0; Ωrad,0 = 0; Ωm,0 6= 0; ΩΛ,0 6= 0), the comoving particle horizon at redshift z is
given by the expression:
                               Z z0 =∞
                                                         c
                        rh =                  p                           dz 0
                                z 0 =z   H0       Ωm,0 (1 + z 0 )3 + ΩΛ,0

       (ii) Solve this integral in the Einstein-de Sitter case (Ωk,0 = 0; Ωm,0 = 1; ΩΛ,0 = 0).
       (iii) If ΩΛ,0 ⩾ 0, a universe with the properties described at (i) will continue to
expand so that a → ∞ and z → −1. Sketch the ΩΛ,0 = 0 solution for rh (z) in the interval
−1 ⩽ z ⩽ 2. On the same axes, sketch the behaviour of rh (z) for our own universe, where
Ωm,0 ≃ 0.3 and ΩΛ,0 ≃ 0.7 (you do not need to solve the integral for this latter case).
Assume that the quantity H0 Ωm,0 takes the same value in both cases. Suggest a physical
interpretation for the behaviour of rh (z) in the ΩΛ,0 > 0 universe.
      (iv) A photon leaves today (t = t0 ) from the present particle horizon. Assuming
an Einstein-de Sitter universe, at what time will the photon arrive at the Earth? Express
your answer in terms of the present age of the universe.



3      (i) An intergalactic gas cloud produces a Lyman alpha absorption line at redshift
zc in the spectrum of a quasar at emission redshift zq . Derive an expression between the
distance dcq of the cloud from the QSO and the redshift difference δz = zq − zc , under
the assumption that δz is small (δz  zq ). Give your answer in terms of the density
parameters Ωm,0 and ΩΛ,0 , assuming a flat cosmology with Ωk,0 = 0 and Ωrad,0 = 0.
       (ii) Calculate the approximate distance in h−1 Mpc between a Lyman alpha cloud
at zc = 3.0 located in front of a quasar at zq = 3.1, in an Einstein-de Sitter cosmology.
       (iii) Typically, the emission redshifts of quasars zq have an associated error
∆zq
1+z  · c = ±1000 km s−1 , whereas the absorption redshifts of Lyman alpha clouds are
much more precisely determined, so that ∆zc  ∆zq . What is the resulting uncertainty
∆dcq
 dcq in the distance between the Lyman alpha cloud and the quasar in (ii)?

        (iv) Explain what is meant by the ‘Proximity Effect’ and explain how this effect
can be used to measure the intensity of the metagalactic ionising background. Your essay
should include a description of the Lyman forest and its redshift evolution. Discuss the
likely origin of the metagalactic ionizing background.




Paper 67                                                                         [TURN OVER
                                                4


4        The lens equation for a thin, spherically symmetric, gravitational lens is given by:

                                             Dds 4GM (θ)
                                   β =θ−                 ,                                 (1)
                                            Ds Dd c2 θ

where β and θ are, respectively, the source and image positions from the centre in angular
coordinates; Dds , Ds and Dd are deflector-source, source and deflector angular diameter
distances respectively; M (θ) is the mass enclosed within θ, and the other symbols have
their usual meaning.
       A simplified model often used to describe the mass distribution of a galaxy or galaxy
cluster is a singular isothermal sphere (SIS), whose projected surface mass density is:

                                                     σ2
                                         Σ(ξ) =                                            (2)
                                                    2Gξ

where ξ is the physical (proper) distance from the centre and σ is the velocity dispersion.
      For the rest of the question you may use: c = 3 × 108 m s−1 ; 1 Gpc = 3 × 1025 m;
G = 7 × 10−11 N m2 kg−2 ; 1 M = 2 × 1030 kg.
        (i) A distant galaxy lies behind a foreground cluster of galaxies and an Einstein
ring is produced.
         What is the condition for the production of an Einstein ring?
         From eq. (1) write an expression for the Einstein radius as a function of the enclosed
mass.
      If the background galaxy and the foreground cluster are at distances such that the
     D
ratio ds = 1 Gpc−1 , calculate approximately the enclosed mass (in solar masses M ) if
        Ds Dd
the Einstein ring has a radius of 1 minute of arc (≃ 3 × 10−4 radians).
        (ii) Assuming that the mass distribution of the lensing cluster can be approximated
by a singular isothermal sphere, use eqs. (1) and (2) to derive an expression for the Einstein
radius in terms of the velocity dispersion σ and the ratio of angular diameter distances
Dds /Ds .
      Hence obtain an approximate estimate for the velocity dispersion of the cluster if
Dds /Ds = 0.5.
       (iii) Consider now the case where the background galaxy is not as well aligned
with the cluster centre as in (i), but is located 4 minutes of arc from the axis joining the
observer and cluster centre. Are multiple images of the galaxy seen by the observer? Give
a reason for your answer.
      State the relationship between the convergence κ and the deflection angle
             ~
α = (β − θ) (θ/θ),
~                  and thereby show that κ = θE /2θ.
       If the galaxy were intrinsically circular, describe qualitatively how it would appear
to an observer on Earth.
      If the magnitude of the shear is equal to the convergence (|γ| = κ), calculate the
magnification factor.

                                                                                     Paper 67
                                         5


      (iv) Describe in a few sentences what is meant by cosmic shear and explain its
importance in physical cosmology.


                              END OF PAPER




Paper 67
