MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                            Part III

Monday, 4 June, 2012     9:00 am to 12:00 pm



                                PAPER 56


                   GENERAL RELATIVITY


               Attempt no more than THREE questions.
                  There are FOUR questions in total.
                       The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                          SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                      None
Treasury Tag
Script paper



              You may not start to read the questions
               printed on the subsequent pages until
               instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                              2

1
(a) Explain the following terms: covariant derivative, connection components.
(b) What does it mean for a connection to be torsion-free?           Define the Levi-Civita
connection and derive the formula
                                   1
                             Γµνρ = gµσ (gσν,ρ + gσρ,ν − gνρ,σ )
                                   2

(c) A 2d Riemannian manifold has metric

                                   ds2 = dr 2 + f (r)2 dφ2

where φ is periodically identified with period 2π (so curves of constant r are circles).
(i) Determine the necessary and sufficient conditions on f (r) for the circle r = r0 to have
the property that all vectors are invariant under parallel transport around the circle.
(ii) Deduce that there is a 2-parameter family of functions f (r) for which all circles of
constant r have this property.
(iii) For this 2-parameter family, show that the metric is locally isometric to the Euclidean
metric. Is it globally isometric?




                                                                        Part III, Paper 56
                                                3

2
Let T a be tangent to a 1-parameter family of timelike geodesics of the Levi-Civita
connection, parameterized by proper time. Let S a be a deviation vector for this family.
(a) Explain the term deviation vector. Explain why [S, T ] = 0.
(b) State and prove the geodesic deviation equation. You may assume the definition of the
Riemann curvature tensor:

                       R(X, Y )Z = ∇X ∇Y Z − ∇Y ∇X Z − ∇[X,Y ] Z

(c) Prove that if S a and T a are orthogonal at one point along a geodesic γ (belonging to
the 1-parameter family) then they are orthogonal everywhere along γ.
(d) Suppose that spacetime is four-dimensional with Riemann tensor
                                         1
                               Rabcd =      R (gac gbd − gad gbc )
                                         12
Show that R must be constant.
(e) Assume that S a is orthogonal to T a . Let f = Sa S a . Show that, in the above spacetime,
the following quantity is constant along a geodesic γ in the family
                                                            1
                               K = (∇T S)a (∇T S)a −          Rf
                                                           12

(f) Obtain a second order differential equation for the evolution of f along γ. Hence
deduce that if R > 0 then geodesics which are close initially will diverge exponentially.
What happens if R < 0?




Part III, Paper 56                                                         [TURN OVER
                                               4

3
In the study of linearized perturbations of Minkowski spacetime, it is assumed that
there exist global coordinates xµ with respect to which the metric has components
gµν = ηµν + hµν where ηµν = diag(−1, 1, 1, 1) and the components of hµν have absolute
values much smaller than 1. Indices are raised with η µν and lowered with ηµν .
(a) Let h = hρ ρ and h̄µν = hµν − (1/2)h ηµν . By imposing the gauge condition ∂ µ h̄µν = 0,
derive the linearized Einstein equation in the form

                                    ∂ ρ ∂ρ h̄µν = −16π Tµν

You may use the following formula, valid in a coordinate basis:

                       Rµ νρσ = ∂ρ Γµνσ − ∂σ Γµνρ + Γτνσ Γµτρ − Γτνρ Γµτσ

(b) Consider a vacuum plane gravitational wave solution with
                                                      
                                h̄µν = Re Hµν eikρ x
                                                     ρ




where Hµν is a constant complex matrix and kρ a constant covector. What restrictions
must Hµν and kρ obey in the above gauge?
Explain why there is a residual gauge freedom hµν → hµν + 2∂(µ ξν) provided ξµ satisfies
a certain condition. Show that this condition is satisfied by
                                                      
                                   ξµ = Re Xµ eikρ x
                                                     ρ




where Xµ is constant. Now show that Xµ can be chosen to bring Hµν to the form
                                                              
                                      0 0   0                0
                                     0 H+ H×                0 
                              Hµν = 
                                     0 H× −H+
                                                               
                                                             0 
                                      0 0   0                0

Use your results to justify the statements that gravitational waves travel at the speed of
light, are transverse, and have 2 independent polarizations.
(c) (i) Explain briefly why it is not possible to define an energy-momentum tensor for the
gravitational field in General Relativity.
(ii) Explain how to define a symmetric tensor tµν that is quadratic in the linearized
gravitational field hµν and conserved ∂ µ tµν = 0. (You are not expected to give detailed
formulae for the curvature tensors expanded to second order.)
(iii) Why is tµν unsatisfactory as a definition of an energy-momentum tensor for hµν ?




                                                                            Part III, Paper 56
                                               5

4
(a) (i) What is a Killing vector field?
(ii) Show that if a spacetime admits a Killing vector field then along any geodesic there is
a conserved quantity.
(iii) Write down 3 linearly independent Killing vector fields of the metric

                           ds2 = A(z)2 −dt2 + dx2 + dy 2 + dz 2
                                                          


where A(z) is a positive function.
(b) An orthonormal basis for the above metric is defined by

                     e0 = A dt     e1 = A dx       e2 = A dy   e3 = dz

Determine the connection 1-forms ω µ ν satisfying deµ = −ω µ ν ∧ eν and the curvature
2-forms defined by
                              Θµ ν = dω µ ν + ω µ ρ ∧ ω ρ ν

(c) The null energy condition states that the energy-momentum tensor should satisfy
Tab ka kb ⩾ 0 for any null vector ka . Show that, if the above metric satisfies the Einstein
equation with an energy-momentum tensor satisfying the null energy condition then

                                      d2
                                           log A(z) ⩽ 0
                                      dz 2




                                  END OF PAPER




Part III, Paper 56
