MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                         Part III

Tuesday, 3 June, 2014 1:30 pm to 4:30 pm



                             PAPER 55


      STRUCTURE AND EVOLUTION OF STARS


               Attempt no more than THREE questions.
                  There are FOUR questions in total.
                    The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                       SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                   None
Treasury Tag
Script paper



              You may not start to read the questions
               printed on the subsequent pages until
               instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                              2

1
      Derive the Lane–Emden equation for a polytrope of index n.
       What are the appropriate boundary conditions to solve this equation to produce a
stellar model?
      Solve the Lane–Emden equation for n = 0, as well as for n = 1. In each case find
the polytropic radius.
      Work out moments of inertia for stars of mass M and radius R that are polytropes
of n = 0 and n = 1.
     Find the equation relating the mass to the radius for a polytrope of index n in the
form M = ARp(n) , and give A in terms of K and n.



2
      Explain what is meant by homologous models of stars.
       For a set of fully radiative stars the opacity is κ ∝ ̺λ T ν and the energy generation
rate is ǫ ∝ ̺T η , where λ, ν and η are constants and the stellar material behaves as a
perfect gas with mean molecular weight µ. Find the mass-radius relationship for such
stars. Assume for your calculations Mr′ = mMr , T ′ = tT , P ′ = pP , L′r = lLr , R′ = ξr.
      Construct the Hertzsprung–Russell diagram for low-mass main-sequence stars burn-
ing hydrogen by the pp chain and with Kramers’ opacity, and for higher mass stars burning
hydrogen by the CNO cycle and with electron scattering opacity. In each case give the
slope of logL/logTeff relation.




                                                                        Part III, Paper 55
                                                 3

3
     A simple and fairly realistic model of main-sequence stars, called the “standard
model”, was devised by Eddington. This model is based on the following assumptions:
      (a) the star is in radiative equilibrium (that is to say it is convectively stable);
      (b) the stellar material behaves as a perfect gas providing pressure Pg along with
radiation pressure Pr ;
      (c) the star is chemically homogeneous, so that the mean molecular weight µ is
independent of radius;
      (d) the opacity κ satisfies the relation

                                                 Mr L
                                        κ=α
                                                 Lr M
where α is a constant, and Mr , Lr are the interior mass and luminosity at radius r. This
assumption is obviously artificial but happens to be reasonably well satisfied by many
stars including the Sun.
      In the standard model prove that:
      (i) the ratio of gas pressure to the total (gas + radiation) pressure is a constant, β,
independent of radius;
      (ii) the luminosity cannot exceed L = 4πcGM
                                               α  , the Eddington limit;
      (iii) the star is a polytrope with polytropic index n = 3;
                                       1/2
      (iv) the stellar mass M ∝ (1−β)
                                   β2
                                             .



4
      Write an essay on the Equation of State that describes matter in stellar interiors.
You should include a discussion of the transition regions between various dominant
contributions and present them on a log ̺/ log T diagram.




                                  END OF PAPER




Part III, Paper 55
