MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                           Part III

Thursday, 28 May, 2015   1:30 pm to 4:30 pm



                             PAPER 58


      STRUCTURE AND EVOLUTION OF STARS


               Attempt no more than THREE questions.
                  There are FOUR questions in total.
                    The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                        SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                    None
Treasury Tag
Script paper



              You may not start to read the questions
               printed on the subsequent pages until
               instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                                2

1
       Write down the equations of stellar structure, assuming that energy transport is by
radiative diffusion in a perfect gas with uniform mean molecular weight µ and neglecting
all microscopic changes in heat content of an element of matter with density ρ. Radiation
pressure can be neglected.
        Assume that the density distribution ρ(r) in the star is linear and is given by
      ρ = ρc (1 − Rr ) , where ρc is the central density of the star r is the distance from the
centre of the star and R is the radius of the star.
    (a) Derive expressions for mass within radius r, mr = m(r), pressure Pr = P (r) and
        temperature Tr = T (r), and give expressions for the central pressure Pc and the
        central temperature Tc in terms of the radius R and the total mass of the star M .
        You can assume that Rr ≪ 1.
    (b) Find the ratio of the radiation pressure to the gas pressure at the centre of this star
        in terms of M . Find the value of M for which the radiation pressure would be equal
        to the perfect gas pressure.
    (c) Assume now that the rate of nuclear energy generation is ǫ = ǫ0 ρ ( TT0 )ν . Derive
                                                                                R1
        an expression for luminosity Lr in terms of M , R, and the integral Iν = 0 f (x)dx,
        with x = Rr and f (x) = x2 (1 − x)2+ν (1 + 2x − 95 x2 )ν .



2
      A star with mass M and radius R is made of a perfect gas and has constant density
ρ and mean molecular weight µ.
    (a) Find the central pressure Pc and the central temperature Tc of such a star in terms
        of its total mass and density.
    (b) What is the gravitational potential energy, Ω, of such a star in terms of M and R?
    (c) Assume that the star shrinks in radius and supports its luminosity from its grav-
        itational energy reservoir, thus converting its gravitational energy into luminosity.
        Quote the virial theorem for spherical star built of a perfect gas. Assume virial
        equilibrium and find an equation for evolution of luminosity.
    (d) Assume now that the star is emitting at the Solar luminosity rate and has the mass
        and radius of the Sun. Find the relevant timescale for this star’s evolution and
        determine if such a process can be ruled out as the source of the Sun’s power.
    (e) Relate a model of a constant density star to the theory of polytropes. Derive the
        Lane-Emden equation and solve it for the appropriate polytrope.




                                                                          Part III, Paper 58
                                                3

3
     Suppose that you have a mixture of simple perfect gas and black body radiation,
                                  k
Assume that the as pressure Pg = µH ρT and the radiation pressure Prad = 31 aT 4 .
                                                       P
    (a) Calculate specific heat at cP in terms of β = Pg
    (b) Define adiabatic exponents Γi , i = 1, 2, 3 and calculate the ratio of specific heats γ
        in terms of Γi . What are the relations between γ and Γi for a perfect gas, a mixture
        of gas and radiation and pure black body radiation.
    (c) Derive the Ledoux criterion for dynamical stability in gas pressure dominated stellar
        matter with a composition gradient.



4
      Derive the equations of linear adiabatic stellar oscillations and discuss what deter-
mines their frequencies. Discuss the acoustic modes.




                                   END OF PAPER




Part III, Paper 58
