MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                           Part III

Tuesday, 31 May, 2016   9:00 am to 12:00 pm



                             PAPER 317


      STRUCTURE AND EVOLUTION OF STARS


               Attempt no more than THREE questions.
                  There are FOUR questions in total.
                    The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                        SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                    None
Treasury Tag
Script paper



              You may not start to read the questions
               printed on the subsequent pages until
               instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                               2

1
      Consider a white dwarf star of mass M , radius R, and luminosity L. A typical white
dwarf may be approximated by an isothermal electron-degenerate core, which comprises
most of the star’s mass, surrounded by an outer layer composed of gas, mean molecular
weight µ, in radiative equilibrium with negligible radiation pressure and opacity given by
Kramer’s law κ = κ0 ̺T −3.5 , at density ̺ and temperature T , with κ0 = const. Assume
that the gas in the outer layer obeys the perfect gas equation of state. In the core, the
degenerate electron gas pressure is given by P = K1 ( µ̺e )5/3 , ̺ is the density and µe is the
mean molecular weight of the electrons and K1 is a constant.
    (a) Find the pressure P as a function of temperature T in the outer layers of this white
        dwarf. Then find L/M in terms of the core temperature Tc , where Tc ≫ Teff , the
        effective surface temperature. Assume that the density ̺ is continuous between the
        core and the outer layers.
    (b) Show that the temperature profile throughout
                                                   the outer
                                                          layers is given by
                                    4 µmH          1   1
                            T (r) =           GM     −     ,
                                    17 k           r R
        where mH is the atomic mass unit and k is Boltzman’s constant.
    (c) Show that the outer layer’s thickness s = R − rb ≪ R, where rb is the inner radius
        of the outer layer.
    (d) By what ratio s1 /s2 would the thickness of the outer layer have to change to produce
        a drop in luminosity from L1 to L2 .




                                                                         Part III, Paper 317
                                               3

2
      Homologous radiative stars are composed of material of uniform composition that
behaves as an ideal gas. Its opacity is given by κ ∝ ̺λ T ν and the energy generation is
given by ǫ ∝ ̺ T η
    (a) Obtain the relation between stellar radius R and mass M in the form R ∝ M X ,
        where X = (η + ν + λ − 1)/(3 + η + ν + 3λ)
    (b) When the opacity is given by the Kramer’s law with λ = 1 and ν = −3.5 and the
        pp chain dominates energy generation with η = 4, obtain relations between stellar
        radius R, luminosity L and mass M in the form R ∝ M X , L ∝ M Y , giving X and
        Y explicitly. Find the slope on which these stars are in the H-R diagram.
    (c) When the opacity is given by electron scattering and the CNO cycle dominates
        energy generation with η = 16, obtain relations R ∝ M X , L ∝ M Y , giving X and
        Y explicitly. Find the slope on which these stars are in the H-R diagram.
        Which of the cases (b) and (c) can be used to model greater and lower stellar masses?




3
      Define the adiabatic exponents Γ1 and Γ2 and derive them for a mixture of a perfect
gas and radiation in terms of β = Pgas /P where P is the total pressure. Calculate Γ1 and
Γ2 for β = 0, 12 , 1.
      Write down the Schwarzschild criterion for convective instability in terms of Γ2 and
the temperature gradient.
      A star of mass M has uniform opacity κ and uniform β. It has a convective core of
mass Mc , there is no nuclear (or otherwise) energy generation outside the core and energy
transport is radiative outside the core. Show that the mass fraction of such core M   M is
                                                                                       c

given by Γ2 /4(Γ2 − 1).



4
       Write an essay on energy generation in stars. Start with the energy balance equation
and then proceed through various contributions to energy generation and losses. While
discussing nuclear fusion reactions describe in detail the pp chain, CN O cycle and the
triple − α reaction and then comment on possible energy generation in further burning.




                                  END OF PAPER



Part III, Paper 317
