MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                         Part III

Friday, 2 June, 2017 1:30 pm to 4:30 pm



                            PAPER 317


      STRUCTURE AND EVOLUTION OF STARS


               Attempt no more than THREE questions.
                  There are FOUR questions in total.
                    The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                       SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                   None
Treasury Tag
Script paper



              You may not start to read the questions
               printed on the subsequent pages until
               instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                              2

1
       Discuss the surface boundary conditions for a star. Assume planar geometry and
write down the differential equation of radiation transfer that determines the specific
intensity Iν in terms of the emission coefficient jν , the opacity κν and the density of
the stellar atmosphere material ̺. Consider the case of a grey atmosphere and use the
Eddington’s first approximation to obtain his closure approximation
                  cPrad (τ ) = 34 πJ(τ )
where Prad (τ ) is radiation pressure and J(τ ) is the mean intensity, τ is the optical depth
and c is the speed of light.
      The equation of radiative transfer for isotropic scattering in a plane parallel grey
atmosphere is
                µ dI(µ,τ
                     dτ
                         )
                           = I(µ, τ ) − J(τ ),
where µ = cos θ and θ is the angle measured from axis z perpendicular to the plane-parallel
atmosphere.
      Assume that this equation has a solution of the form:
                                               γ
                I(µ, τ ) = α(β + τ + µ + 1+ǫµ    e−δτ ),
where α, β, γ, ǫ and δ are constants. Find the mean intensity J(τ ), the flux F (τ ) and
radiation pressure Prad (τ ).
       Show that the condition of radiative equilibrium in the atmosphere, F (τ ) = F =
                                3
constant, implies that α = 4π     F and ǫ is very small but non-zero. Then, in the limit of
large τ , obtain that cPrad (τ ) = 4π
                                    3 J(τ ). From the equation of radiative transfer deduce
that that δ = ǫ.
      The exact solution of the grey atmosphere problem can be written in terms of the
Hopf function q(τ ) as:
                 J(τ ) = 43 F (τ + q(τ )).
      Assume that q(0) = 0.57, q(∞) = 0.71 and find β, γ. How much brighter would the
centre of the stellar disk (µ = 1) appear compared to the limb (µ = 0) of such star?




                                                                       Part III, Paper 317
                                              3

2
      Write down the equations of stellar structure for a spherically symmetric star which
does not suffer any mass loss. Describe clearly the criterion for the use of an appropriate
equation of energy transfer using the concepts of radiative and convective gradients.
       Assume that the core of a star is isothermal, with T = 107 K and a mass
Mcore ≃ 1M⊙ . Just outside the core, there is a very thin layer which produces essentially
all of star’s luminosity. Outside the energy producing layer there is the star’s radiative
envelope. Assuming P , ̺ and Mr behave as power laws of radius through the envelope,
find a solution to the equations of hydrostatic equilibrium, the ideal gas law and radiative
transfer with Kramer’s opacity and calculate the ratio of the stellar radius to the core
radius for a photospheric temperature of 4000 K. What kind of star is described by the
above simple assumptions?



3
      Obtain the equation for the gradient of the velocity with radius for a steady,
spherically symmetric stellar wind, assuming that the temperature gradient is determined
by the equation of radiative transfer. Discuss the properties of the solutions.
                                                                   P
       Let the pressure P be given by P = Pgas + Prad and let β = Pgas , where gas pressure
Pgas is given by the ideal gas law and Prad is radiation pressure for a gas of photons. The
critical luminosity Lcrit is given by Lcrit = 4πcGM
                                                 κ
                                                     r
                                                       , where Mr is the mass contained in
                                                                  Lr
a sphere of radius r and κ is the opacity. Assume now that Lcrit       = 1, where Lr is the
luminosity at radius r. Explain in terms of β why such wind cannot be accelerated to
achieve supersonic velocities.



4
       Write an essay on the equation of state for stellar matter. Starting with the
momentum distribution function f (p) obtain relations between pressure and the part
of the internal energy of particles that corresponds to their kinetic energy for both the
non-relativistic and relativistic cases. Discuss the Maxwellian gas and a gas of photons
and derive the relevant equations of state. What is the equation of state for a degenerate
gas in the limit of high density. On a log-log graph of temperature versus density explore
the various regimes including the approximate divisions between the extreme relativistic
and non-relativistic cases as well as the extreme degenerate and non-degenerate cases.
Quantitatively explain the location of these boundaries. Sketch also an approximate
location of the curve where pairs of electrons and positrons are important.




                                 END OF PAPER



Part III, Paper 317
