MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                         Part III

Tuesday, 5 June, 2018 9:00 am to 12:00 pm



                            PAPER 317


      STRUCTURE AND EVOLUTION OF STARS


               Attempt no more than THREE questions.
                  There are FOUR questions in total.
                    The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                       SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                   None
Treasury Tag
Script paper



              You may not start to read the questions
               printed on the subsequent pages until
               instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                                     2

1
(i) Derive the virial theorem in the form
                                          Z
                           1 ¨
                           2 I = 2T + 3              P dV − 3PS V + Ω,
                                              star

where I is a moment of inertia, T is the internal kinetic energy, P is the pressure, Ω is the
gravitational energy of all mass elements dm of the star and integration is over the star
volume V , and the subscript S refers to the stellar surface. State all necessary assumptions
in your derivation and carefully define I, T and Ω.
You may start from
                                    d2 r    1
                                       2
                                         = − ∇·P + F,
                                    dt      ̺
where P is the general (symmetric) stress tensor, to be defined,ZF = −∇Φ for an isolated
                                                                       Gdm′
star, for which the gravitational potential Φ is given by Φ = −             ′
                                                                               .
                                                                 star |r − r |

(ii) Consider an ideal gas with ratio of specific heats at constant pressure and volume
     cp
γ=      = const and find the pressure integral in the derived virial theorem. For a steady
     cv
state star composed of fully ionised gas obtain a relation between Ω and U , where U is
the total internal energy.

(iii) Show that a polytrope of index n has

                                                3 GM 2
                                    Ω=−                .
                                               5−n R

                                                         G M2
and find expressions for U and Ω in terms of                  and γ.
                                                          R




                                                                         Part III, Paper 317
                                             3

2
(i) Consider a low-mass star with a thin radiative envelope of material that behaves as an
                                                                 d log T
ideal gas and a convective region below. In the envelope ∇ =              = ∇rad and the
                                                                 d log P
opacity is given by κ = κ0 ̺n T −s . Find the pressure P as a function of temperature T
in the envelope with P = Pphot at the photosphere, where κ0 is a constant, ̺ the density
and T is the temperature. Determine the variation of ∇ in the envelope in the form
      1 Pa
∇=         , with constant C and exponents a and b to be determined.
      C Tb
(ii) The photospheric pressure Pphot = 3κ2GMR2 , where M is the total mass and R the
                                           phot
photospheric radius of the star. Show that ∇phot = 81 .
                                                     Teff
(iii) Find an expression for ∇(r) as a function of          in the envelope when H − ion
                                                     T (r)
opacity is dominant and given by κ = κ0 ̺0.5 T 9 and Teff is the photospheric temperature.
         Teff
(iv) Find     when convection sets in and comment on the extent of the radiative envelope
          T
below the photosphere and the role of H − opacity.

                  8 2/9
                            
    You may use   5     ≈ 1.11




Part III, Paper 317                                                     [TURN OVER
                                                4

3
(i) Consider a grey radiative atmosphere of a cool star in hydrostatic equilibrium. The
stellar material is in local thermodynamic equilibrium. By considering the change in
momentum of photons interacting with matter as they escape from the atmosphere show
that the radiation pressure falls of according to
                                     dPrad    κ̺L
                                           =−         ,
                                      dr      4πr 2 c
where κ is the opacity, ̺ the density, L the luminosity, and Prad is radiation pressure.
                                Rτ
(ii) The optical depth is τ = − κ̺dr. Use Eddington’s first approximation to find the
                                 0
radiation pressure when τ = 0 and thence deduce that:
                                            1 4     3 
                                  T 4 (τ ) = Teff 1+ τ ,
                                            2       2
where T is the temperature and Teff is the photospheric temperature.
                  d log T      3
(iii) Show that           =         .
                    dτ      8 + 12τ
                                                   d log P    1
(iv) For electron scattering κ = const, show that           = .
                                                      dτ      τ
(v) Define the adiabatic exponent Γ2 . Show that if Γ2 < 34 convection must set in at large
optical depth.



4
Discuss the evolution of a 5 M⊙ star. Indicate important points in the evolution on a
Hertzsprung–Russell diagram and give estimates of the age of the star at these points.
Describe changes in the composition profiles of hydrogen and helium during the evolution.
Pay particular attention to the Schönberg–Chandrasekhar limit, the evolution across the
Hertzsprung gap, dredge-up events, blue loops, the Cepheid instability strip and thermal
pulses.




                                 END OF PAPER




                                                                      Part III, Paper 317
