MAT3, MAMA, NST3AS
MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                        Part III

Monday, 10 June, 2019 1:30 pm to 4:30 pm



                           PAPER 311


                        BLACK HOLES


               Attempt no more than THREE questions.
                  There are FOUR questions in total.
                   The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                      SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                  None
Treasury Tag
Script paper
Rough paper



             You may not start to read the questions
              printed on the subsequent pages until
              instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                                  2

1

    (a) Consider an isolated uncharged star that undergoes gravitational collapse to form
        a black hole. Briefly explain why it is believed that the spacetime at late time is
        characterized by only two parameters.

    (b) The metric and gauge potential of a spherically symmetric isolated charged gravi-
        tating object in five spacetime dimensions is, in Schwarzschild-like coordinates,

                                dr 2                                                    Q
            ds2 = −f (r)dt2 +         + r 2 (dθ 2 + sin2 θ dφ2 + cos2 θ dψ 2 ) ,   A = − 2 dt ,
                                f (r)                                                   r

        where θ ∈ [0, π/2], φ ∈ [0, 2π], ψ ∈ [0, 2π] are coordinates on a unit radius three
        sphere and
                                                  2M     Q2
                                      f (r) = 1 − 2 + 4 ,
                                                   r      r
        where M > 0 is the mass of the object and Q > 0 is the electric charge.

          (i) Construct the analogue of ingoing Eddington-Finkelstein coordinates and
              determine the form of the metric in these coordinates. Explain briefly why
              this metric
                   q      can be analytically extended across the surface r = r+ where
                           p
              r+ = M + M 2 − Q2 , provided M ⩾ Q.
          (ii) Show that r = r+ is a Killing horizon of the Killing vector field k = ∂/∂t and
               determine its associated surface gravity.
         (iii) Sketch the Penrose diagram(s) for the spacetime(s) described by this metric
               for any M > 0 and Q > 0.
         (iv) The equation of motion for an electrically charged scalar field can be written
              as
                                             Da D a Φ = 0 ,
              where D = ∇ − i q A and q is the scalar electric charge. Consider Φ of the
              form
                                       Φ = e−i ω t R(r)Θ(θ) ,
              and show that the wave equation reduces to ordinary differential equations
              for R(r) and Θ(θ), which you should determine. You may assume that
                                                 1   √
                                        ∇µ Qµ = √ ∂µ  −gQµ .
                                                          
                                                 −g




                                                                              Part III, Paper 311
                                                3

2     Let Σ denote a three-dimensional spacelike hypersurface with unit normal n,
embedded in a four-dimensional spacetime (M, g).

  (i) Show how to construct the first fundamental form hab . Describe how to construct
      the second fundamental form Kab of this surface, show that Kab is a symmetric
      2−tensor and that it is independent of how n is extended in a neighbourhood of Σ.

  (ii) Derive the Gauss equation for the components of the curvature tensor (3) Rabcd of Σ
       in terms of the four dimensional Riemann tensor and second fundamental form.

 (iii) Show that (3) R = R + 2Rab na nb − K 2 + Kab K ab , where Rab is the Ricci tensor
       associated with g, R its Ricci scalar and K = g ab Kab .

 (iv) Suppose that (M, g) satisfies the Einstein equation and that Kab is proportional to
      the induced metric on Σ. Show that (3) R ⩾ 0 provided that 24π ρ − K 2 ⩾ 0, where
      ρ ≡ Tab na nb and K ≡ gab Kab .




3       A spacetime (M, g) is stably causal if there exists a continuous timelike vector
field ta such that the spacetime (M, g̃) possesses no closed timelike curves, where
g̃ab = gab − ta tb . In what follows, you may assume that M is connected.

   (i) Show that every timelike and null vector of gab is a timelike vector of g̃ab , and thus
       that the light cone of g̃ab is strictly larger than that of gab .

  (ii) Show that if gab is stably causal, then for some timelike vector field r a , gab − ra rb is
       also stably causal.

 (iii) Show that in a stably causal and null geodesically complete spacetime, two points
       with the same chronological future are the same.

 (iv) Let (M, g) be any spacetime where M is connected. Show that if a nonempty
      subset U ⊂ M is equal to its own chronological future and also equal to its own
      chronological past, then U = M.




Part III, Paper 311                                                          [TURN OVER]
                                               4

4       The marking scheme is equally distributed between (a) and (b).

    (a) Write an essay giving a detailed account of the quantum theory of a free scalar field
        in a globally hyperbolic spacetime. You should explain carefully why the particle
        concept is ambiguous in general and why it can be made unambiguous in a stationary
        spacetime. Describe how to calculate the expected number of particles produced
        in a spacetime that is stationary at early and late times but time-dependent in
        between.

    (b) Explain why the discovery that black holes emit thermal radiation implies that the
        laws of black hole mechanics can be reinterpreted in thermodynamical terms.




                                  END OF PAPER




                                                                       Part III, Paper 311
