MAT3, MAMA, NST3AS, MAAS
MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                           Part III

Thursday, 30 May, 2019   1:30 pm to 4:30 pm



                            PAPER 317


      STRUCTURE AND EVOLUTION OF STARS


               Attempt no more than THREE questions.
                  There are FOUR questions in total.
                    The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                        SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                    None
Treasury Tag
Script paper
Rough paper



              You may not start to read the questions
               printed on the subsequent pages until
               instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                              2

1
Consider a group of stars, all of which have the same homogeneous chemical compoition
and are built from an ideal gas. Radiation pressure can be neglected. The energy
generation occurs through the p-p chain with ǫ = ǫpp ̺ T 4 , where ǫpp is a constant, ̺
the density and T the temperature. All the energy is transported by radiation. Opacity
is given by Kramer’s formula κ = κ0 ̺ T −3.5 , where κ0 is a constant. M is the total mass
of a star, R its radius, L its luminosity and Teff is the stars effecive temperature.
Use the appropriate stellar structure equations to derive the following expressions, clearly
stating any additional assumptions you need to achieve your goal:
(i) M ∝ R13
(ii) L ∝ M 71/13
(iii) Teff ∝ Lq where you should give the value of q and obtain the slope of a line on
      the Hertzsprung-Russell diagram occupied by the discussed stars.
(iv) How would your results in (i), (ii) and (iii) change if the energy generation occured
     through the CNO cycle with ǫ = ǫCNO ̺ T 16 and opacity were given by electron
     scattering with κ = constant?



2
(i) Derive the Schwarzschild and Ledoux criteria for convective instability.
(ii) Consider a stellar atmosphere composed of a perfect monatomic gas of uniform
composition. The atmosphere is in radiative equilibrium with temperature profile T =
T (Teff , τ ) where Teff is the effective temperature of the star and τ is the optical depth.
This temperature profile arises from the Eddington closure approximation for the outer
boundary condition at the stellar surface. You should specify the temperature profile
because you will need it to solve the problem.
Assume that the pressure profile in the atmosphere is given by P 2 = P02 ln(1 + 32 τ ).
Show that the convection sets when τ = 23 exp( 54 ) − 1 .
                                                       




                                                                       Part III, Paper 317
                                                3

3
(i) Consider a cold white dwarf supported by pressure arising from a fully degenerate
electron gas. Derive the appropriate general equation of state and find limits for both the
non-relativistic and relativistic limits stating all necessary assumptions.

(ii) Suppose that the white dwarf is supported by non-relativistic degeneracy pressure.
    (a) Use the appropriate stellar structure equations to derive an equation describing
        the structure of this white dwarf.
    (b) Continue to obtain an expression that relates the radius R to the total mass M of
        this white dwarf in a form M ∝ Rs and specify s.




4
(i) A spherical star is composed of a gas with equation of state P = K̺2 , where K is a
constant, P the pressure and ̺ the density. Find ̺ = ̺(r). Derive an expression for the
radius of the star
                                                    1
                                                Kπ    2
                                       R=                 .
                                                2G

Show that the ratio of its mean density ̺ to its central density ̺c is:
                                           ̺    3
                                              = 2
                                           ̺c  π

(ii) A cubic star of volume L3 is composed of a gas obeying the same equation of state
as above. Show that it is possible to construct a solution to the structure equations for
0 ⩽ x ⩽ L, 0 ⩽ y ⩽ L and 0 ⩽ z ⩽ L such that ̺ vanishes on the faces of the cube. Find
̺ = ̺(x, y, z).
For this cubic star derive an expression
                                           ̺    8
                                              = 3.
                                           ̺c  π

Do you expect cubic stars likely to exist in nature on either theoretical or observational
grounds? Explain why?




                                  END OF PAPER




Part III, Paper 317
