MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                        Part III

Wednesday, 16 June, 2021   12:00 pm to 3:00 pm



                            PAPER 312


            FIELD THEORY IN COSMOLOGY

  Before you begin please read these instructions carefully

  Candidates have THREE HOURS to complete the written examination.

               Attempt no more than THREE questions.
                  There are FOUR questions in total.
                   The questions carry equal weight.




              You may not start to read the questions
               printed on the subsequent pages until
               instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                                2

1
(a) For a massless scalar field ϕ in de Sitter spacetime with cs = 1, consider the interaction
                                         Z
                                                     λ
                                    S ⊃ dtd3 x a3 ϕ̇2 ϕ ,
                                                     3!
where a dot denotes a derivative with respect to cosmological time t. Do you expect that
this interaction can induce large non-Gaussianity in single-field slow-roll inflation? Justify
your answer.
(b) Rewrite this interaction in terms of conformal time τ and compute the bispectrum B
of ϕ at τ = 0, using the de Sitter mode functions
                                          H
                               fk (τ ) = √      (1 + ikτ )e−ikτ .
                                           2k 3
(c) Starting from the scale invariant property

                       hφ(µx1 )φ(µx2 )φ(µx3 )i = hφ(x1 )φ(x2 )φ(x3 )i ,

where µ is a positive real number, derive how the bispectrum B(k1 , k2 , k3 ) scales as
ka → µka for a = 1, 2, 3. Show that the bispectrum you computed above obeys this
scaling.




                                                                          Part III, Paper 312
                                               3

2
        Consider a scalar field φ whose action is invariant under a shift symmetry,

                                        ∆φ(x) = c ,

for any constant c. On a background hφi = 0, compute the corresponding soft theorem
for the bispectrum of φ as follows:

    (a) Derive the transformation of φ(k). The generator Q of the above symmetry obeys

                                          i[Q, φ] = ∆φ .                               (1)

        Write down Q in terms of the momentum conjugate Π of φ.

    (b) Using the free field expressions for Π and φ as well as the Wronskian condition
        derive that
                                                     1
                            ih[Q, φ(k)φ(k0 )]i =         hφ(k)φ(k0 )φ(0)i ,
                                                   P (0)

        where φ(0) = φ(k = 0) and P (k) is the power spectrum of φ.

    (c) Show that the correlator h∆(φ(k)φ(k0 ))i vanishes. Hence, using (1), determine the
        soft theorem for the bispectrum of φ.

    (d) State the soft theorem obeyed by bispectrum of the curvature perturbations R in
        single-field inflation. Compare that soft theorem with the one you derived above.




 Part III, Paper 312                                                          [TURN OVER]
                                                4

3
(a) In Newtonian perturbation theory for Dark Matter, consider the continuity and Euler
equations

                         δ 0 + ∇ [(1 + δ) v] = 0 ,
                                                     1
                        vi0 + Hvi + v · ∇vi = −∇i φ − ∇j (ρσij ) .
                                                     ρ
Briefly discuss their physical meaning and define each of the variables. Assuming a curl-
free velocity and a vanishing velocity dispersion, derive the coupling kernels α and β.
(b) Draw all the diagrams to compute the matter power spectrum up to fourth order (one
loop) and write down the corresponding expressions in terms of the convolution kernels
Fn . Draw a plot of the various contributions to the matter power spectrum today at this
order, carefully labelling the axis and specifying some reference points on each axis.
(c) In the Effective Field Theory of Large Scale Structures, write down the counterterms
needed to renormalize the one-loop power spectrum. Using that

                                                        k2
                                  lim F3 (k, q, −q) ∝      ,
                                  kq                   q2

show that the counterterm related to the speed of sound has the correct momentum scaling
to cancel the cutoff dependence of one of the one-loop contributions to the power spectrum.
(d) Consider a local Lagrangian bias model
                                                 (L)
                                    δg(L) (q) = b1 δ(q) ,

where δ(q) represents the Dark Matter inhomogeneities in Lagrangian space and is
                                                         (E)            (L)
assumed to be Gaussian. Derive the linear Eulerian bias b1 in terms of b1 .




                                                                       Part III, Paper 312
                                                  5

4
     Compute the left-hand side of the Boltzmann equations for the photons of the
Cosmic Microwave Background (CMB) to first order in perturbations as follows.
(a) Consider the metric in Newtonian gauge,

                       ds2 = −a2 (1 + 2Ψ)dη 2 + a2 (1 − 2Φ)δij dxi dxj ,

and work to linear order in the Newtonian potentials Ψ and Φ. In the absence of anisotropic
stress, how are Ψ and Φ related? You may assume this relation in the following. Derive
the following expression of the photon momentum
                                                           
                                 Pµ =     2
                                            1 − Ψ, (1 + Φ)p̂i ,
                                        a
where p2 ≡ gij P i P j ,  ≡ pa and p̂i is a unit-norm vector (p̂i δij p̂j = 1) pointing in the P i
direction. Using the following expressions for the Christoffel symbols,
                                                                                    
         Γ000 = H + Ψ0           Γ00i = ∂i Ψ         Γ0ij = H − Φ0 − 2H(Ψ + Φ) δij ,

compute d ln /dη to first order in perturbations.
(b) Let f be the photon distribution function
                                                          −1
                                                  
                               f = exp                    −1     .
                                            aT̄ (1 + Θ)

where Θ = Θ(η, x, p̂) are temperature perturbations. Re-write df /dη in terms of partial
derivatives. Expand each term to first order in perturbations Φ, Ψ and Θ.
(c) Draw a plot of the total power spectrum of CMB temperature anisotropies as well as
the Sachs-Wolfe and Doppler contributions. Carefully label the axis and indicate on them
a couple of reference points with the appropriate units. Briefly discuss what diffusion
damping is and how it is visible in this plot.



                                     END OF PAPER




 Part III, Paper 312
