                                        MAMA/310, NST3AS/310, MAAS/310

MAT3
MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                         Part III

Monday, 5 June, 2023   1:30 pm to 4:30 pm



                            PAPER 310


                          COSMOLOGY

Before you begin please read these instructions carefully
  Candidates have THREE HOURS to complete the written examination.

               Attempt no more than THREE questions.
                  There are FOUR questions in total.
                   The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                     SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                 None
Treasury tag
Script paper
Rough paper



              You may not start to read the questions
               printed on the subsequent pages until
               instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                              2

1
(a) From the continuity equation, determine the scaling of the energy density ρ with scale
factor a for a component with constant equation of state parameter w. Hence derive an
expression for the Hubble parameter H(z) in terms of z, H0 , and the density parameters
Ωi,0 and equations of state wi of the different components i. Finally, show that the
comoving distance along the line of sight to a certain redshift z is given by
                                   Z z
                                1                    dz 0
                       χ(z) =           P                                            (1)
                               H0 0                      0 3(1+wi ) 1/2
                                           i Ωi,0 (1 + z )


(b) The angular diameter distance dA relates the physical size perpendicular to the line of
sight, x, of a small object to its observed angular size θ via θ = x/dA . For a flat universe
dA is given by:

                                                   χ(z)
                                       dA (z) =                                                  (2)
                                                   1+z

       In all remaining parts of this question, consider a simple, flat LCDM cosmology with
only two components: matter and standard dark energy (with w = −1). By considering
both low- and high redshift limits of dA (z) or otherwise, show that the angular diameter
distance – redshift relation must turn over, i.e., there is a redshift beyond which an object
with fixed physical size appears larger in the sky if it is at higher redshift. Does such a
turn-over also exist in cosmologies with non-standard dark energy, i.e. where the equation
of state of the dark energy component deviates slightly from w = −1?
(c) Galaxy surveys are able to make precise observations of the angles θ(z) subtended at
different redshifts by the “BAO scale” χd , which is a standard comoving distance, here
assumed oriented perpendicular to the line of sight. Assume that, while the value of χd is
not known, it is fixed and does not evolve with redshift. Explain how such measurements
of θ(z) can be used to determine the parameter Ωm,0 in the simple LCDM cosmology,
stating how many different redshifts need to be probed to determine this parameter.
      [Hint: note that the angle subtended by χd is given by θ = aχd /dA .]
(d) Show that the comoving distance ∆χ between two sources separated by a small redshift
difference ∆z and by a small angle ∆θ is given in the simple LCDM cosmology by

                                                  q
                                   f (z, Ωm,0 )
                   ∆χ(∆z, ∆θ) =                    ∆z 2 + y 2 (z, Ωm,0 )(∆θ)2                    (3)
                                       H0
                                                                                 1
      to leading order in ∆z and ∆θ, where f (z, Ωm,0 ) = √                                      and
                                                                        Ωm,0 (1+z)3 +(1−Ωm,0 )
y(z, Ωm,0 ) is a function you should specify (but may leave in integral form.)
      [Hint: you may assume that the comoving distance ∆χ can be written in terms
of comoving distances along (∆χk ) and perpendicular to the line of sight (∆χ⊥ ) as
∆χ2 = ∆χ2k + ∆χ2⊥ .]
(e) Now note that the comoving BAO scale χd can also be measured in redshift difference
(not just angle). Can measurements of both angular and redshift differences corresponding
to the fixed BAO scale be used to determine Ωm,0 even if only measurements around a
single redshift are available and the value of χd is unknown? Briefly justify your answer.
                                                                           Part III, Paper 310
                                              3

2
(a) Explain carefully why the temperature of the cosmic neutrino background, Tν , is
related to the CMB photon temperature, T , by
                                                     1/3
                                      Tν         4
                                         =                   .                          (1)
                                      T          11

In your explanation, you may assume without proof that the entropy S = ρ+P
                                                                        T V is
conserved in an expanding universe.
(b) After neutrino decoupling, the relic neutrinos retain the relativistic Fermi-Dirac
distribution function, which is given by
                                                      1
                                  f (p) =                                               (2)
                                            e(p−µν )/Tν + 1
in terms of the magnitude of the momentum p and the chemical potential of the neutrinos
µν .
       First consider the standard case where the chemical potential is negligible. Write
down an integral expression for the energy density of one relic neutrino species and show
that in the limit of early times when Tν  mν , with mν the small mass of this neutrino
species, the energy density is:
                                              7π 2
                                         ρν ≈      (Tν )4 .                              (3)
                                              120
[Hint: you may assume that g = 2 for this neutrino species and that the Rdensity of
                              g                                                    ∞ xc
particles in phase space is (2π)3 f (p). You may also use the standard integrals: 0 ex +1 =
                                     2                        4
c! 1 − 21c ζ(c + 1), where ζ(2) = π6 , ζ(3) ≈ 1.202, ζ(4) = π90 , ζ(5) ≈ 1.037.]
(c) In the remainder of the question, consider a so-called “degenerate” neutrino which has
a large and positive chemical potential µν  Tν , a negligible neutrino mass, and g = 1.
Show that the energy density of such a degenerate neutrino species is approximately given
by
                                        ρν ≈ Aµ4ν                                      (4)
where you should specify the constant A. How does the energy density of the corresponding
antineutrinos compare to this result? You may assume thermal equilibrium holds.
       [Hint: to perform the first phase space integral, you may wish to make a simple,
constant approximation to f (p) in the integrand in the regimes p < µν and p > µν and
neglect the thin transition between these regimes.]
(d) Derive an upper bound on µν /Tν by requiring that the energy density in degenerate
neutrinos does not exceed the critical density ρc today (which you may assume is given in
terms of the CMB temperature by ρc = 6 × 104 T 4 ).
(e) Which cosmological observations could distinguish a universe with degenerate neutri-
nos from the standard scenario? Briefly justify your answer.




Part III, Paper 310                                                     [TURN OVER]
                                                  4

3       In this question you will discuss features in the CMB and matter power spectra.
You may quote without proof results for the evolution of the potential perturbation Φ in
different epochs.
(a) Starting from the continuity equation
                                                        
                    0        δPr    P¯r                P̄r
                   δr + 3H        −       δr = − 1 +         (∇ · vr − 3Φ0 )         (1)
                             δρr    ρ¯r                ρ̄r
and the Euler equation
                                                
                                         1 P¯r              ∇δPr
                          vr0 + 3H         −       vr = −           − ∇Φ                     (2)
                                         3   ρ¯r          ρ̄r + P¯r
(where δr , vr , ρr , Pr are the radiation density contrast, velocity perturbation, energy
density, and pressure, primes indicate derivatives with respect to conformal time τ , and
bars indicate background quantities), show that the radiation perturbations during matter
domination are described by the following differential equation:
                                            1       4
                                      δr00 − ∇2 δr = ∇2 Φ.                                   (3)
                                            3       3
(b) Determine the time-evolution during matter domination of the Sachs-Wolfe term
S(k, τ ) ≡ δ4r (k, τ ) + Φ(k, τ ), which is typically the largest contribution to the CMB
temperature anisotropies. Hence sketch the shape of the Sachs-Wolfe transfer function
TS on large scales as a function of wavenumber k, where TS is defined via the primordial
comoving curvature perturbation R(k, 0) by S(k, τ ) = TS (k, τ )R(k, 0). Comment briefly
on the relation of your result to the shape of the CMB power spectrum. Finally, explain
briefly whether you would expect the baryon transfer function Tb (k, τ ) ≡ δR(k,0)
                                                                             b (k,τ )
                                                                                      (where δb
is the baryon density contrast) to have oscillatory features soon after recombination.
(c) Sketch the transfer function for the cold dark matter comoving gauge density contrast,
defined as Tc (k, τ ) ≡ ∆R(k,0)
                          c (k,τ )
                                   , soon after recombination. You may neglect any impact of
baryons here (so that this is just a sketch of the matter transfer function.) Briefly explain
the origin of the key features apparent in this transfer function.
(d) Finally, consider the growth of matter density perturbations after recombination, now
including small corrections due to the baryons. The evolution of the cold dark matter
(denoted c) and baryon (denoted b) densities, which together make up the total matter
density (m), is described by two coupled differential equations

                              δ̈c + 2H δ̇c − 4πG(ρ̄c δc + ρ̄b δb ) = 0,                      (4)

                               δ̈b + 2H δ̇b − 4πG(ρ̄c δc + ρ̄b δb ) = 0,                     (5)
where δ is the relevant density contrast and dots indicate derivatives with respect to time t.
From suitable combinations of these equations, determine uncoupled evolution equations
for the variables D ≡ δc − δb and δm = ρ̄ρ̄mc δc + ρ̄ρ̄mb δb . Derive the evolution of both D and
δm with scale factor. Hence show that δδcb → f at late times, where f is a constant you
should specify. Briefly comment on the physical interpretation of your result.
      [Hint: it may be helpful to show that δδcb = ρ̄ρ̄m
                                                       m δm +ρ̄b D
                                                         δm −ρ̄c D .]
(e) Would you expect the matter power spectrum, when carefully including the impact
of baryons, to have any oscillatory features? Very briefly motivate your answer using the
results of previous sections of the question.
                                                                     Part III, Paper 310
                                                      5

4      In this question you will discuss single-field slow-roll inflation.
(a) A treatment of quantum fluctuations in single-field slow-roll inflation with a scalar
field φ predicts the following dimensionless power spectrum of comoving curvature per-
turbations:                              2  2
                                   2      H      H
                                  ∆R =                ,                               (1)
                                          φ̇     2π
where dots indicate time derivatives. Specify when the right hand side of this equation is
                                                                   d ln ∆2
to be evaluated; then show that the scalar spectral index ns ≡ 1 + d ln kR is given by

                                   ns − 1 = −6V + 2ηV ,                                   (2)

where V and ηV are the first and second potential slow-roll parameters, respectively.
                                                                      1
                                                                           φ̇2
                                                                     2M 2
       [Hint: recall that  ≡    − d dN
                                     ln H
                                          =         =− HḢ2             pl
                                                               is the first Hubble slow-roll
                                                                       H2
                      d ln 
parameter and η = dN is the second Hubble slow roll parameter; you may assume that
for the potential slow-roll parameters V , ηV the following holds during slow-roll inflation:
      M2
           2                            
            V                      2 V,φφ = 2 − η .]
V ≡ 2pl V,φ =  and ηV ≡ Mpl           V            2

(b) Let Ñ (φ) be the number of e-folds of inflation remaining before inflation ends, given
a field value φ. Show that
                                            Z φe
                                                               1
                               Ñ (φ) =              dφ̃      q         ,                  (3)
                                             φ             Mpl 2V (φ̃)

where φe is the field value when inflation ends.
(c) Assume that the power spectrum of tensor modes arising from inflation is given by
              H 2
                 
∆2h (k) = M82 2π   . Show that the tensor-to-scalar-ratio r ≡ ∆2h /∆2R is given by:
           pl


                                             r = CV ,                                     (4)

where you should specify the constant C.
                                                                                     2 2
(d) Consider an inflation model with the potential V (φ) = V0 − m 2φ and with φ rolling
                                                                                    2 2
towards φ > 0 from φ = 0. Assuming that for nearly all of the evolution of φ, V0  m 2φ ,
derive Ñ (φ) and hence show that the tensor-to-scalar-ratio is given by:

                                                              2
                                                         φe
                           r ≈ f C(ns − 1)       2
                                                                    e(ns −1)Ñ (φ)         (5)
                                                         Mpl
where you should specify the constant f .
      Derive an upper limit for r in this model, assuming that φe < Mpl , that 40 < Ñ < 60,
and that ns − 1 = −0.04.


                                  END OF PAPER



Part III, Paper 310
