                                        MAMA/311, NST3AS/311, MAAS/311

MAT3
MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                         Part III

Tuesday 4 June 2024   9:00 am to 12:00 pm



                            PAPER 311


                         BLACK HOLES

Before you begin please read these instructions carefully
  Candidates have THREE HOURS to complete the written examination.

               Attempt no more than THREE questions.
                  There are FOUR questions in total.
                   The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                     SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                 None
Treasury tag
Script paper
Rough paper



             You may not start to read the questions
              printed on the subsequent pages until
              instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                              2

1
(a) Define what it means for a spacetime to be static and explain how to introduce
coordinates in such a spacetime so that the metric takes the form ds2 = g00 (x)dt2 +
gij (x)dxi dxj with g00 < 0.
(b) Explain carefully how to construct the Kruskal extension of the Schwarzschild space-
time. Let k be the Killing vector field associated with Schwarzschild time translations.
What is k in Kruskal coordinates?
(c) On a large Kruskal diagram, show the following (with clear labelling):
(i) an ingoing radial null geodesic; (ii) an outgoing radial null geodesic; (iii) an extendible
causal curve; (iv) an incomplete, inextendible, causal geodesic; (v) a complete, inextend-
ible, causal geodesic.
[You may add a few words of explanation if necessary.]
(d) Alice, Bob and Carol are astronauts on a rocket at a fixed position with radius R > 2M
outside a Schwarzschild black hole. At a certain instant, Bob sets his watch to read 0 and
Alice immediately leaves the rocket and falls radially into the black hole. Later, when
Bob’s watch reads time T , he also leaves the rocket and falls radially into the black hole,
along an identical trajectory. Carol, who is more sensible, remains in the rocket.
(i) As he crosses the event horizon, Bob looks at Alice. By how much is she redshifted?
[Hints. Argue that Bob’s trajectory is related to Alice’s trajectory by an isometry. Use
this to relate the Kruskal coordinate VA , VB at which each crosses the horizon. Recall that
an observer with velocity U a measures the energy of a photon with momentum P a to be
−U · P .]
(ii) Carol observes Alice during her journey. Describe in two sentences what she sees.




                                                                         Part III, Paper 311
                                              3

2
(a) Let Σ be a surface of constant r inside a Schwarzschild black hole (so r < 2M ).
(i) Show that this surface, with its induced metric, is isometric to a cylinder R × S 2 in
four-dimensional Euclidean space.
(ii) Compute the extrinsic curvature of Σ, expressing your answer in Schwarzschild
coordinates. [You may wish to use Kab = hca hdb ∇c nd .]
(iii) View Σ with its induced metric and extrinsic curvature as initial data for the vacuum
Einstein equation. What is the maximal Cauchy development of this initial data? Is it
extendible? Discuss, in a few sentences, whether this is consistent with the strong cosmic
censorship conjecture.
(b) Explain how to construct the Penrose diagram of four-dimensional Minkowski space-
time.
(c) The conformal wave equation is ∇a ∇a ψ − (1/6)Rψ = 0. For the rest of this question
you may assume that if ψ is a solution of this equation in a spacetime with metric g then
ψ̄ ≡ Ω−1 ψ is a solution of the same equation in a spacetime with metric ḡ = Ω2 g. We will
take g to be the Minkowski metric (with R = 0 so ψ satisfies the standard wave equation)
and ḡ to be the metric of the Einstein static universe.
Assume that ψ̄ is globally defined on the Einstein static universe.
(i) Show that vψ has a well-defined limit at I + and uψ has a well-defined limit at I − ,
where u and v are the usual retarded and advanced time coordinates.
(ii) What is the corresponding result at i± ? (Your answer should be non-zero for generic ψ̄.)




Part III, Paper 311                                                       [TURN OVER]
                                              4

3
(a) An isolated star undergoes gravitational collapse, during which a trapped surface forms.
Explain why it is believed that a Kerr black hole will form. You should describe briefly
suitable theorems and conjectures in your answer.
(b) Let N be a null hypersurface with normal na .
(i) Prove that na is tangent to null geodesics (the generators of N ).
(ii) Consider a null geodesic congruence containing the generators of N . Prove that the
rotation of this congruence vanishes on N .
(c) The following generalization of the Kerr metric is a charged solution of the equations
of motion of low energy string theory:

            ∆                2 Σ     sin2 θ  2                     2
      g=−     dt − a sin2 θdϕ + dr2 +         (r + 2br + a2 )dϕ − adt + Σdθ2
            Σ                   ∆       Σ
where
                   ∆ = r2 − 2(m − b)r + a2        Σ = r2 + 2br + a2 cos2 θ
and m, a, b are constants. Assume that ∆ has real roots r± with r+ > r− and r+ > 0.
(i) Define new coordinates as follows:

                          dv = dt + A(r)dr        dχ = dϕ + B(r)dr

where the functions A, B both have a simple pole at r = r+ . Show that A, B can be
chosen such that the metric in coordinates (v, r, θ, χ) can be analytically continued through
r = r+ .
[Hint: does smoothness of grχ suggest a relation between A and B?]
(ii) Prove that the surface r = r+ is a Killing horizon and calculate its angular velocity.
[Hint: look for a linear combination of Killing fields ξ a such that ξµ |r=r+ has only a r-
component.]
(iii) Calculate the surface gravity of this Killing horizon for a = 0.




                                                                         Part III, Paper 311
                                            5

4
(a) Prove the version of the first law of black hole mechanics that relates the mass and
angular momentum of infalling matter to the change in the area of the event horizon.
(You may assume Raychaudhuri’s equation, properties of Gaussian null coordinates and
properties of the surface gravity.)
(b) In the Penrose process, a particle of energy E and angular momentum L falls into
a Kerr black hole. Use the first and second laws of black hole mechanics to show that
ΩH L ⩽ E. Explain why a particle with negative E cannot escape from the ergosphere.
(c) Explain why the discovery that black holes emit thermal radiation implies that the laws
of black hole mechanics can be reinterpreted in thermodynamical terms. A radiating black
hole shrinks, in violation of the second law of black hole mechanics. What assumption in
the statement of the second law is violated by this process? Why does this shrinking not
imply a violation of the second law of thermodynamics?



                                 END OF PAPER




Part III, Paper 311
