  O.4 Anomaly cancellation in superstring theories . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 799

P Boundary conformal field theory                                                       801
  P.1 Conformal boundary conditions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 801
  P.2 The boundary state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 803
  P.3 Neumann and Dirichlet boundary conditions in the free boson CFT . . . . . 804
  P.4 Neumann and Dirichlet boundary conditions in a free fermion CFT with di-
      agonal GSO projection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 807

Q Double-scaled matrix quantum mechanics                                                809
  Q.1 One-matrix quantum mechanics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 809
  Q.2 The c = 1 MQM . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 810
  Q.3 Particle-hole scattering and non-perturbative effects in the c = 1 MQM . . . 813
  Q.4 Non-singlet sector and long string states . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 814

R Kinematics of holographic correlators                                                 816
  R.1 The boundary condition on a bulk scalar field . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 816
  R.2 The two-point function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 817
  R.3 Gauge field in AdS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 818
  R.4 Gravity in AdS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 819
  R.5 Witten diagrams . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 820
  R.6 Mellin amplitudes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 821




                                            17
1       Prologue

1.1     The case of quantum gravity

A classical theory of gravity is the mechanics of a dynamical metric field gµν (x) that admits
diffeomorphism invariance, also known as general coordinate invariance, as a gauge symme-
try. Such a theory may be formulated through an action functional of the Einstein-Hilbert
form, namely                              Z
                                        1     p
                      S[gµν , · · · ] = 2 d4 x − det g [R(g) + Λ + · · · ]                (1.1)
                                       2κ
where κ is a coupling constant1 , R(g) is the Ricci scalar curvature associated with the metric
gµν , and Λ is the cosmological constant. In (1.1) we have not specified the “matter” degrees
of freedom on which the action may also depend, and other possible covariant couplings on
the RHS that involve contractions of the Riemann tensor and its covariant derivatives that
are suppressed in the long wavelength limit. The classical gravitational physics described
by the action (1.1) is consistent with all experiments to date, most notably terrestrial tests
of gravitational red shift, detection of gravitational waves, and observation of astrophysical
black holes.
    On the other hand, all non-gravitational physical phenomena are compatible with the
principles of quantum mechanics, which are moreover refined with the incorporation of rel-
ativistic locality in the framework of quantum field theory. So far, there has not been any
experiment that directly indicates whether gravitational physics is compatible with, or nec-
essarily violates, the cherished principles of quantum mechanics.2 Nonetheless, there exists
no satisfactory theoretical framework that combines a classical theory of gravity in its exact
form with the quantum theory of known elementary particles. Indeed, a gedankenexperi-
ment in which the superposition of quantum states of a particle leads to a superposition of
states of macroscopic objects that source different gravitational fields suggests that gravita-
tional fields ought to be characterized by quantum states as well (or else, insisting on classical
gravitational physics would lead to a violation of quantum mechanics at a microscopic level).
   Therefore, driven by not only philosophical satisfaction but a quest for mathematical
consistency, we seek to unify gravitational and particle physics through a fully quantum
theory of gravity. In its most conservative interpretation, this entails a Hilbert space of
physical states, equipped with Hamiltonian/unitary time evolution, that admits observables
through expectation values of Hermitian operators, while adhering to the principle of general
    1
    In our convention κ2 = 8πGN where GN is Newton’s constant.
    2
    For recent discussions on the possibility of direct observation of quantum gravitational effects, see Parikh,
Wilczek and Zahariade, Phys. Rev. D 104, no.4, 046021 (2021) [1], Phys. Rev. Lett. 127, no.8, 081602
(2021) [2].


                                                       18
covariance. In general relativity, the classical “state” may be characterized by initial data
on a spacelike hypersurface of the spacetime manifold. In an attempt at a quantum theory
of gravity, one may postulate the existence of a particular quantum state that resembles the
notion of vacuum in a certain “background” spacetime, and a Hilbert space that character-
izes all possible particle or field excitations in the background spacetime, which in particular
includes deformations of the spacetime metric itself. Furthermore, one anticipates a suit-
able quantum notion of background independence, namely there should not be a preferred
background spacetime, in the sense that the Hilbert spaces characterizing excitations over
different admissible background spacetimes should be related by a change of basis and that
the underlying quantum theories should be equivalent.
    It is not a priori clear, however, what classes of background spacetime should be admis-
sible in a quantum gravitational theory. For instance, it is unclear how to define gauge-
invariant observables in a closed universe, or even the notion of physical states thereof. In
contrast, in an open universe it is possible to define gauge-invariant observables “at infinity”,
where the asymptotic geometry of the spacetime is preserved in physical processes. One may
begin by postulating a vacuum state that describes a maximally symmetric and empty open
universe, such as Minkowskian spacetime in the absence of a cosmological constant, or anti-
de Sitter spacetime in the presence of a negative cosmological constant. The normalizable
quantum states are expected to characterize local excitations that preserve the asymptotic
geometry. Moreover, a quantum theory of gravity should admit gravitons, which are mass-
less particles of spin 2 that mediate gravitational interactions that are governed by general
relativity at long distances.
    In an asymptotically Minkowskian spacetime, a generic state is expected to evolve into a
superposition of wave packets of stable particles whose interactions diminish as they propa-
gate away from one another. The latter amounts to a basis of the Hilbert space, known as
the out-states, which are labeled by the quantum numbers of the stable particles as if they
were free. Likewise, their time-reversed counterparts are known as in-states. The S-matrix,
defined as the change of basis relating the in- and out-states, is expected to be a unitary
operator that characterizes scattering in Minkowskian spacetime and serves as a fundamen-
tal observable of quantum gravity.3 In asymptotically anti-de Sitter spacetime, the notion
of the S-matrix is appropriately replaced by transition amplitudes with injection of sources
on the conformal boundary of the spacetime.
   3
    In four-dimensional spacetime, however, the S-matrix elements associated with the Fock basis of graviton
states suffer from infrared divergence, and one must seek appropriate infrared-safe observables such as
inclusive scattering probabilities or energy correlators (see Herrmann, Kologlu and Moult, arXiv:2412.05384
[hep-th] [3]).




                                                    19
1.2     Limitations of quantum field theory

There are two distinct notions of (relativistic) quantum field theory that are commonly
adopted by the working physicists. The first is that of an effective field theory, such as
quantum electrodynamics (QED), chiral perturbation theory, and the standard model of
particle physics. An effective field theory is typically defined through a functional inte-
gral with respect to field variables subject to an ultraviolet cutoff, and captures physical
phenomena at low energies or long distances/wavelengths. The second notion is that of a
local or ultraviolet-complete quantum field theory, which assumes local field operators that
are well-defined non-perturbatively and obey strict microcausality, namely that any pairs
of spacelike-separated local operators commute. Examples of what we believe to be local
quantum field theories include quantum chromodynamics and the Ising model near criti-
cality, where the short distance physics is governed by asymptotic freedom and conformal
invariance respectively.
    Gravity is peculiar, however, in that it ties the physics of high energies to that of large
distances. For instance, the (horizon) size of a black hole, which is expected to be produced
in a high energy scattering process at an impact parameter less than the Schwarzschild
radius, would grow with its energy. Closely related is the thermodynamic entropy of a black
hole deduced from the low energy effective theory, whose statistical interpretation requires
understanding the black hole “micro” states which appears out of reach in an effective field
theory framework.
    On the other hand, local quantum field theory is fundamentally in tension with gravity,
as illustrated by

Weinberg-Witten theorem: [4] The existence of a local conserved stress-energy tensor
operator Tµν (x) is incompatible with the existence of massless particles with spin greater
than 1, such as the graviton.
      To understand this result, let us consider the state |⃗p, h⟩ of a single massless particle with
null momentum pµ = (p0 , p⃗) and helicity h = p̂ · J,     ⃗ 4 normalized according to ⟨⃗p′ , h|⃗p, h⟩ =
δ 3 (⃗p − p⃗′ ). Here p0 = |⃗p| by the massless dispersion relation, p̂ is the unit vector along p⃗, and
J⃗ is the angular momentum vector. The matrix element of the stress-energy tensor between
a pair of one-particle states,
                                                           ′
                          ⟨⃗p′ , h|Tµν (x)|⃗p, h⟩ = ei(p−p )·x ⟨⃗p′ , h|Tµν (0)|⃗p, h⟩,              (1.2)

also known as the “gravitational form factor”, integrates along a spatial hypersurface to the
   4
    While we assume 4-dimensional Minkowskian spacetime in this exposition, the argument can be straight-
forwardly generalized to higher dimensions, where the notion of helicity is replaced by a representation of
the little group.


                                                      20
matrix element of the energy-momentum vector,
                                 Z
                         ⟨⃗p , h| d3⃗x Tµ 0 (x)|⃗p, h⟩ = pµ δ 3 (⃗p − p⃗′ ).
                            ′
                                                                                                              (1.3)

The phase of the state |⃗p, h⟩ may be specified by demanding that |⃗p, h⟩ is related to a reference
state |⃗pR , h⟩ by a Lorentz transformation L(⃗p) that takes (|⃗pR |, p⃗R ) to (p0 , p⃗). The choice
of L(⃗p) is not unique. For our purpose, it suffices to choose L(⃗p) to be continuous near a
nonzero momentum vector p⃗ of interest, so that the matrix element (1.2) is continuous in
the p⃗′ → p⃗ limit.5 It then follows from (1.3) and (1.2) that
                                                                         pµ
                                      lim ⟨⃗p′ , h|Tµ 0 (0)|⃗p, h⟩ =         .                                (1.4)
                                       ′
                                     ⃗ →⃗
                                     p  p                              (2π)3
This can be extended by Lorentz invariance to the more general matrix element
                                                                     pµ pν
                                    lim ⟨⃗p′ , h|Tµν (0)|⃗p, h⟩ =            .                                (1.5)
                                     ′
                                    ⃗ →⃗
                                    p  p                            (2π)3 p0
Given any pair of distinct null momenta p, p′ , there exists a Lorentz frame in which p⃗′ = −⃗p.
Now in this frame, the 1-particle states |⃗p, h⟩ and |⃗p′ , h⟩ have opposite angular momenta,
J⃗ = −J⃗′ = hp̂. Under rotation by angle θ around p⃗-axis, the states |⃗p, h⟩ and |⃗p′ , h⟩ transform
into
                                        p, h⟩ = eihθ |⃗p, h⟩,
                                   R(θ)|⃗
                                   b
                                                                                                 (1.6)
                                        p′ , h⟩ = e−ihθ |⃗p′ , h⟩.
                                   R(θ)|⃗
                                   b
The matrix element of the stress-energy tensor, on the other hand, transforms according to

  Rµ ρ (θ)Rν σ (θ)⟨⃗p′ , h|Tρσ (0)|⃗p, h⟩ = ⟨⃗p′ , h|(R(θ))
                                                      b    †
                                                                         p, h⟩ = e2ihθ ⟨⃗p′ , h|Tµν (0)|⃗p, h⟩.
                                                             Tµν (0)R(θ)|⃗
                                                                    b
                                                                                                            (1.7)
         ρ
Here Rµ (θ) is the corresponding rotation matrix in the vector representation of the Lorentz
group, and has eigenvalues 1, eiθ , e−iθ . We see that the matrix element of Tµν (0) can
be nonzero only if h = 0, ± 21 , or ±1. For other values of helicity of the particle, we would
conclude that the matrix element of Tµν (0) is identically zero for all p⃗ ̸= p⃗′ , which contradicts
(1.5).
    This simple argument implies that a quantum theory of gravitons (helicity h = 2) cannot
admit a local stress-energy tensor operator. This should not come as a surprise, as there
is no “total” (gravity+matter) stress-energy tensor in general relativity. Nonetheless, it
demonstrates that the framework of a local quantum field theory is inadequate for quantum
gravity. Perhaps we have to give up on the notion of local field operators, and focus on
potentially well-defined observables such as the gravitational S-matrix.
   5
                                                                                                     d3 p⃗f (⃗
                                                                                                 R
     This is necessary for the energy-momentum density ⟨f |T0µ (x)|f ⟩ of a wave packet |f ⟩ ≡               p)|⃗
                                                                                                                p, h⟩
of finite width in position space to be localized in space.


                                                       21
1.3       Yang-Mills theory as a string theory

Historically, the idea of string theory emerged not from quantum gravity but rather as an
attempt at explaining the observed spectra of hadrons (more on this in Chapter 2). Since
then, quantum chromodynamics (QCD) has been recognized as the correct theory of strong
interactions. A priori, QCD is defined through a functional integral over gluon and quark
fields. In a confining phase, the gluon and quark fields create not true particles, but “jets”
that mimic particles in a high energy process and eventually turn into a shower of hadrons.
It has been long conjectured and made increasingly precise that one may as well view the
fundamental degrees of freedom of QCD to be those of color flux tubes, a.k.a. strings, rather
than gluons or quarks, and that the oscillation modes of the flux strings give rise to the
spectrum of hadrons.
   We will explain this idea in the simplest6 nonabelian gauge theory in four dimensions,
namely pure Yang-Mills theory with SU (N ) gauge group in the absence of quarks. The the-
ory can be defined through the lattice-regularized Euclidean path integral, e.g. the partition
function
                                  Z YY    4
                             Z=             [dUx,µ ] exp(−S[U ])                         (1.8)
                                             x∈L µ=1

where L is a four-dimensional lattice generated by basis vectors eµ . Ux,µ ≡ exp(iAµ (x)eµ ) is
an SU (N ) matrix variable associated with the link connecting the lattice site x to x + eµ .
[dUx,µ ] is the Haar measure on the SU (N ) group manifold. The action S[U ] is taken to be

                                                   1X
                                       S[U ] = −       tr(UP + UP† ),                                    (1.9)
                                                   g P

                                                             −1 −1
where the sum is over plaquettes P = (x; µ, ν), with UP ≡ Ux,ν  Ux+eν ,µ Ux+eµ ,ν Ux,µ , and g is
the gauge coupling constant at the lattice scale. The quantum Yang-Mills theory is defined
by taking the continuum limit a ≡ |eµ | → 0, and simultaneously sending the coupling
g ≡ g(a) → 0 according to the renormalization group equation, while fixing a mass gap scale
Λ that governs both the masses of glueballs and the tension of flux strings.
    The gauge-invariant observables can be extracted from correlation functions of the Wilson
line operator                                  Z            
                                   W (C) = trP exp i            Aµ (x)dxµ ,                            (1.10)
                                                            C

where P exp stands for path-ordered exponentiation along the closed path C. The lattice-
                                      ←
                                      −
                                      Q
regularized expression for W (C) is tr C Ux,µ , where the product is taken over links labeled
by (x, µ) along the path C.
  6
      This refers to simplicity in its Lagrangian/path integral formulation, not necessarily of the dynamics.


                                                       22
    A flux string extended along a large spatial loop C can be created by acting W (C) on the
vacuum state |Ω⟩. The presence of a flux string can be unambiguously diagnosed by its charge
with respect to a ZN -valued 1-form “center” symmetry.7 If we impose periodic boundary
condition in one spatial direction by identifying the coordinate x1 ∼ x1 + 2πR, the 1-form
center symmetry then gives rise to an ordinary (0-form) ZN global symmetry that counts
the number of flux strings winding the x1 -circle modulo N . Under the assumption that the
ZN symmetry is not spontaneously broken by the vacuum, the state W (C)|Ω⟩ describes a
flux string (generally with complicated excitations) that carries the same winding number
as the path C.
    A substantial simplification occurs in the limit of large N with fixed mass gap scale Λ.
Standard diagrammatic counting arguments imply that the correlation functions to leading
order factorize into products of two-point function of single-trace operators, with corrections
suppressed by powers of 1/N . For any closed loop C, W (C) is a single trace operator, which
creates a flux string or a glueball which may be thought of as a short closed string. The
large N factorization of correlation functions implies that the amplitude of a single flux
string splitting into two, or emitting a glueball, is suppressed by 1/N . In other words, the
large N Yang-Mills theory is a theory of weakly interacting (flux) strings.
   At infinite N , the flux strings are free in the sense that they do not interact with one
another, and there is an infinite tower of massive glueball or closed string states. Certain
aspects of the glueball spectrum can be inferred by studying the interaction (or lack thereof)
between ripples on a single flux string, which in the long wavelength limit is captured by a 1+1
dimensional effective theory of Nambu-Goldstone bosons associated with the spontaneously
broken Poincaré symmetry of the four-dimensional ambient spacetime.
    A direct construction of the quantum theory of the flux string, viewed as the fundamental
object rather than built out of gauge fields, has proven difficult even at infinite N as a free
relativistic string theory. Currently, the only method for determining the low lying glueball
mass spectrum is based on numerical simulation of the two-point function of a pair of Wilson
loop operators on the lattice. However, we will see in Chapter 2 that a simple quantum theory
of free relativistic strings, known as the critical bosonic string theory, can be formulated in
not 4 but 26 spacetime dimensions.


1.4     The road map

We will see that the formulation of string theory based on the path integral over worldsheets
naturally gives rise to a gravitational theory in the spacetime, in the sense that the spacetime
  7
    That is, a Wilson line (in the fundamental representation) cannot terminate, except through N -way
junctions.


                                                 23
metric is dynamical. Furthermore, the spacetime metric can be viewed simultaneously as a
background in which the strings propagate, and as a field whose quanta can be identified
with certain modes of a closed string. The spacetime geometry, as well as the string coupling
strength, are amongst data that characterize a solution of string theory.
    Indeed, the bosonic string theory admits 26-dimensional Minkowskian spacetime as a
classical solution. However, at nonzero string coupling, this solution is unstable due to
the presence of a tachyonic closed string mode. This does not necessarily mean that the
bosonic string theory is inconsistent; rather, it signifies that the 26-dimensional Minkowskian
spacetime is not a vacuum configuration. In fact, the bosonic string theory does admit a
two-dimensional spacetime solution that breaks spatial translation symmetry and is pertur-
batively stable. With this in mind, we will develop the perturbative scattering theory of
bosonic strings, first on-shell in the BRST formalism in Chapter 3, 4, and then off-shell and
refined in the string field theory formalism in Chapter 5.
    An interesting extension of the critical bosonic string framework that incorporates fermionic
degrees of freedom on the worldsheet leads to the notion of superstring theory. It will turn
out that the superstring theory admits the 10-dimensional Minkowskian spacetime as a vac-
uum solution, and appears to be consistent as an interacting quantum gravitational theory
in a surprisingly elegant manner. We will introduce the Neveu-Schwarz-Ramond worldsheet
theory of the superstring and the on-shell formulation of the superstring S-matrix in Chap-
ter 7. Superstrings in more general spacetime backgrounds and the closely related heterotic
string theory are considered in Chapter 9 and 11. Further subtleties in superstring pertur-
bation theory concerning spurious singularities and the need for off-shell continuation via
string field theory will be discussed in Chapter 10.
    The consistency of interacting superstring theory beyond perturbation theory requires
the inclusion of non-perturbative objects and processes. An important class of the non-
perturbative objects, known as D-branes, can be described (surprisingly) as boundary condi-
tions on the string worldsheet as we will introduce in Chapter 12. The dynamics of D-branes,
or equivalently that of open strings supported by the D-branes, will be analyzed in Chapter
13. Closely related non-perturbative aspects of string theory, including open string tachyon
condensation and strong/weak coupling dualities, will be discussed in Chapter 15 and 18.
We will introduce holographic dualities based on the decoupling limit of D-branes in Chapter
20, and finally return to the emergence of strings from gauge theory in Chapter 23.




                                              24
2       The effective string and its quantization

2.1     Nambu-Goto theory

We begin by formulating the classical mechanics of a relativistic string in D-dimensional
Minkowskian spacetime. In the Lagrangian approach, this can be achieved by parameterizing
the configuration of the string in space with an appropriate set of embedding coordinates that
are viewed as dynamical variables, and writing the Lagrangian or the action as a functional
of these variables and their time-derivatives. The main novelty here, in contrast to the
mechanics of say an elastic band, is that we will insist on preserving relativistic Poincaré
invariance of the underlying dynamics. To make the Poincaré symmetry manifest at the
level of the action functional, it will be convenient to allow for some redundancy and not to
commit to any particular parameterization of the string.
    Let (σ 0 , σ 1 ) be an arbitrarily chosen non-degenerate coordinate system on the worldsheet
of the string. Given the values of σ 1 that label a point on the string and σ 0 that labels
an instant of time, we will specify the Minkowskian spacetime coordinates of this point of
the string as X µ (σ 0 , σ 1 ), µ = 0, 1, · · · , D − 1. The “embedding coordinates” X µ can be
viewed as dynamical fields on the worldsheet. This description of the string configuration
is subject to the “worldsheet diffeomorphism” gauge ambiguity, namely reparameterizations
of the worldsheet coordinates (σ 0 , σ 1 ). An admissible action of the string, S[X], should be
a functional of X µ (σ) that is invariant with respect to worldsheet diffeomorphism, as well
as the spacetime Poincaré symmetry which acts on X µ as a global symmetry. The simplest
such action is the Nambu-Goto action
                                                 Z    q
                                                    2
                               SNG [X] = −T d σ − det(∂a X µ ∂b Xµ )                       (2.1)

where the overall constant T is the string tension.
   To illustrate the dynamics that follows, consider a (piece of) string extended along the
X direction, that wiggles in the X 2 , · · · , X D−1 directions as well. By definition, a physical
    1

worldsheet also extends in the X 0 time direction. The static gauge is the choice of the
worldsheet coordinates by identifying them with a pair of the physical Minkowskian time
and spatial coordinates,
                                   σ0 = X 0, σ1 = X 1.                                       (2.2)
Clearly, this gauge choice completely removes the worldsheet reparameterization ambiguity,
and leaves X i (i = 2, · · · , D − 1) as the only dynamical fields. For small fluctuations, or
more precisely fluctuations that involve small gradients of X i , the Nambu-Goto action can



                                               25
be expanded as
                   Z           p
    SNG [X] = −T dX 0 dX 1 (1 − ∂0 X i ∂0 X i )(1 + ∂1 X j ∂1 X j ) + (∂0 X i ∂1 X i )(∂0 X j ∂1 X j )
              Z                                                           
                     0    1        T       i 2       i 2
                                                                     ⊥ 4
            = dX dX −T +               (∂0 X ) − (∂1 X ) + O((∂X ) ) .
                                   2
                                                                                                   (2.3)
Thus, the dynamics of the string, or equivalently of the ripples on the string, is at least
locally characterized by D − 2 massless scalar fields X i in 1 + 1 dimensions. Furthermore,
the higher derivative form of the interaction terms e.g. (∂X ⊥ )4 in the Lagrangian is such
that the modes of the ripples are weakly coupled in the long wavelength limit. Note that on
a closed string, however, the static gauge coordinates necessarily degenerate at the “turning
points” of the string, and one must either include a suitable matching condition on the X i
fields or work in a different gauge that resolves the coordinate singularity.
   The Nambu-Goto action (2.1) can be straightforwardly generalized to that of a string
propagating in a spacetime with a general metric Gµν (X),
                                 Z     q
                      S[X] = −T d2 σ − det(Gµν (X)∂a X µ ∂b X ν ).                (2.4)

In this description, the spacetime general coordinate transformation amounts to not a sym-
metry of the worldsheet theory but rather a field redefinition on X µ . Consider for instance
the rotational motion of a string that is confined within a spatial plane, or equivalently a
rotating string in 3-dimensional Minkowskian spacetime. It is convenient to adopt polar
coordinates, in which the Minkowskian metric takes the form

                                     ds2 = −dt2 + dr2 + r2 dθ2 ,                                  (2.5)

and work in the “polar static gauge” by choosing the worldsheet coordinates

                                          σ 0 = t,        σ1 = r                                  (2.6)

on a segment of the string that extends in the radial direction. This leaves a single dynamical
embedding coordinate θ appearing in the Nambu-Goto action
                                   Z      p
                          S = −T dtdr 1 − r2 (∂t θ)2 + r2 (∂r θ)2 .                       (2.7)

We will inspect a simple class of (local) solutions to the Euler-Lagrange equation, of the
form
                                     θ(t, r) = θ0 + ωt.                              (2.8)
(2.8) describes a straight segment of a rotating string. A straight rotating string cannot
extend infinitely, as otherwise segments of the string would move faster than the speed of

                                                     26
light. An admissible configuration is a closed string that extends to the maximal radial
distance r = R and folds upon itself. In this case, the coordinate r ranging from 0 to R
covers a quarter of the string.




                           Figure 1: The folded spinning string.
                                           R RR                      √
    The action can now be written as S = 4 dt 0 drL, where L = −T 1 − r2 ω 2 is the La-
grangian density, and R, ω are dynamical variables. Demanding that the action is stationary
with respect to R then determines R = 1/ω, i.e. the ends of the string move at the speed
of light. The energy E and the angular momentum J of the string, given in the canonical
formalism by the Hamiltonian and the canonical momentum conjugate to θ respectively,
evaluate to                          Z R
                                              dr         2πT
                              E = 4T      √            =     ,
                                      0     1 − r2 ω 2    ω
                                     Z R                                               (2.9)
                                                r2 ω       πT
                              J = 4T     dr √            = 2.
                                      0       1 − r2 ω 2   ω
It follows that E and J obey
                                        E 2 = 4πT J.                                  (2.10)
The relation (2.10) is known as the Regge trajectory “with zero intercept”. Note that a
more general rotating string solution, in contrast to (2.8), can have ripples that propagate
along the radial direction. This would increase the total energy at given angular momentum,
leading to E 2 ≥ 4πT J.
    The relevance of the Regge trajectory in the mass/spin relation of hadrons was famously
suggested by Chew and Frautschi in 1961 based on limited experimental data. While it
resembles some crude features of the hadron spectrum in the real world, the relation (2.10)
is expected to hold asymptotically for a family of glueballs in the pure SU (N ) Yang-Mills
in four dimensions in the limit of large J and N , with the string tension T of order Λ2 .


2.2    The effective string

It is useful to characterize the geometry of the worldsheet embedding through the induced
metric
                                      hab ≡ ∂a X µ ∂b Xµ .                          (2.11)



                                            27
The extrinsic curvature of the worldsheet, viewed as a surface embedded in the D-dimensional
Minkowskian spacetime, is characterized by the second fundamental form

                                               Ωµab = ∇a ∂b X µ ,                                          (2.12)

where ∇a is the covariant derivative with respect to the induced metric (2.11). Note that
Ωµab is a symmetric tensor with respect to the worldsheet indices (ab), and as a vector in the
Minkowskian spacetime is orthogonal to the worldsheet.8 It further obeys the relation

                                        Ωµac Ωbdµ − Ωµad Ωbcµ = Rabcd ,                                    (2.13)

where Rabcd is the Riemann tensor associated with hab .
   The equation of motion that follows from the Nambu-Goto action (2.1) can be expressed
simply as
                                       hab Ωµab = 0.                              (2.14)
While the Nambu-Goto action is a universal action that captures long wavelength fluctu-
ations, the true action of a relativistic string may be corrected by additional terms that
involve Ωµab and become important for short wavelength modes. Assuming locality on the
worldsheet, at least in the regime of small extrinsic curvature, such corrections to the La-
grangian density may be organized according to terms of increasing weights, where we assign
weight 0 to ∂a X µ and weight 1 to each additional derivative.
    The Nambu-Goto action has weight zero. Under the assumption of Poincaré symmetry of
the target Minkowskian spacetime, the lowest weight possible corrections to the Nambu-Goto
action, subject to the worldsheet diffeomorphism gauge invariance, are of the form
                            √
                      Z
                        d2 σ − det h α1 (hab Ωµab )2 + α2 hac hbd Ωµab Ωcdµ .
                                                                          
                                                                                     (2.15)

Due to (2.13), a linear combination of these two terms is proportional to the Euler charac-
teristic
                                                 √
                                          Z
                                        1
                                  χ=         d2 σ − det hR.                          (2.16)
                                       4π
(2.16) is well known to be topological in the sense that it is invariant under continuous
deformations of hab or X µ , and therefore does not affect the equation of motion.9
    Furthermore, any first order deformation of the Nambu-Goto Lagrangian density that
is proportional to the LHS of the Nambu-Goto equation of motion (2.14), i.e. of the form
   8
      This follows from the explicit expression ∇a ∂b X µ = ∂a ∂b X µ − Γcab ∂c X µ , where Γcab is the Christoffel
symbol built out of the induced metric hab . In particular, Ωµab ∂c Xµ = ∂a ∂b X µ ∂c Xµ − Γdab hcd = 12 (∂a hbc +
∂b hac − ∂c hab ) − Γcab hcd = 0.
    9
      In fact, (2.16) evaluates to a nontrivial result only for a worldsheet configuration that involve split-
ting/creation or joining/annihilation of strings.


                                                        28
hab Ωµab Lµ for some Lµ , can be removed by a field redefinition of the form X µ → X µ + δX µ
with δX µ ∝ Lµ . Such is the case for the first term in (2.15). Therefore, modulo a field
redefinition, (2.15) does not affect the classical dynamics of a string. The leading nontrivial
possible corrections to the Nambu-Goto Lagrangian density are weight 4 terms such as
                   µ
(Ωµab Ωab  2
       µ ) and (Ωab Ω
                      abν 2
                          ).
   In a quantum theory of relativistic strings, such as that of color flux strings in the four-
dimensional SU (N ) Yang-Mills at large N , we expect the long wavelength fluctuations on a
long string to be governed by a worldsheet Wilsonian effective action that takes the form of
Nambu-Goto theory corrected by the higher derivative terms as outlined above.


2.3    Polyakov’s formalism

The classical string mechanics described by the Nambu-Goto action can be equivalently
formulated through the Polyakov action [5]
                                           Z
                               µ       1      2
                                                  p
                    SP [gab , X ] = −        d  σ  − det g g ab ∂a X µ ∂b Xµ , (2.17)
                                      4πα′
where we have introduced a dynamical metric field gab on the worldsheet, and written the
                        1            ab
string tension as T = 2πα ′ . Here g    stands for the inverse metric. The equation of motion
for gab amounts to the vanishing of
                                                                          
                         4π δSP          1       µ        1     cd    µ
                 Tab ≡ √           = − ′ ∂a X ∂b Xµ − gab g ∂c X ∂d Xµ ,                (2.18)
                          −g δg ab       α                2

which is equivalent to setting
                                    gab ∝ hab = ∂a X µ ∂b Xµ .                             (2.19)
Indeed, upon imposing (2.19), SP reduces to the Nambu-Goto action SNG . Note that SP
is invariant with respect to worldsheet diffeomorphism as well as the Weyl transformation
gab → e2ω(σ) gab . Equivalence with Nambu-Goto theory requires treating both the worldsheet
diffeomorphism and the Weyl transformation as gauge symmetries, so that (2.19) leaves no
residual physical degrees of freedom in gab . The X µ ’s are now a set of D free massless scalar
fields propagating in a general worldsheet geometry.
    The curvature of a two-dimensional metric gab is entirely determined by its Ricci scalar
R(g), whose Weyl transformation is R(e2ω g) = e−2ω (R(g) − 2∇2 ω). Locally it is always
possible to find a Weyl transformation that sets R to zero, thereby relating gab to a flat metric.
Furthermore, we can use a combination of Weyl and diffeomorphism gauge transformations
to set, at least locally,
                                          gab = ηab .                                       (2.20)

                                               29
The gauge condition (2.20) is called the conformal gauge.
       In the conformal gauge, the equation of motion for gab , namely

                                              Tab = 0,                                         (2.21)

is viewed as a set of constraints on X µ , known as “Virasoro constraints”. These are supple-
mented by the equation of motion for X µ , which can be written as

                                            ∂ a ∂a X µ = 0.                                    (2.22)

In conclusion, the classical mechanics of the Nambu-Goto string is equivalently characterized,
at least locally on the worldsheet, by the dynamical equations (2.21) and (2.22). Let us note
that despite (2.22) taking the form of a free wave equation, the Virasoro constraints (2.21)
are nonlinear with respect to X µ .


2.4       A first attempt at quantization

One may attempt to construct a quantum theory of strings by promoting the Polyakov action
principle (2.17) to a path integral of the form
                                         Z
                                    1                       E        µ
                            Z=              [Dgab DX µ ] e−SP [gab ,X ] .          (2.23)
                                 vol(G)

For convenience, we have adopted the Euclidean convention, namely that the worldsheet
metric gab is assumed to be of Euclidean signature, and SPE is the Euclidean version of
Polyakov’s action, given by10
                                    Z
                                1           p
                            E
                          SP =        d 2
                                          σ  det g g ab ∂a X µ ∂b Xµ .           (2.24)
                               4πα′

This is so that the functional integral formally converges (modulo gauge redundancy and
UV regularization) and we will not need to worry about operator ordering in correlation
functions. The relevant Lorentzian observables can be recovered by analytic continuation
when needed. The path integral should be normalized by removing the gauge redundancy,
formally represented as division by the volume of the (infinite dimensional) group G of
gauge transformations, namely diffeomorphism and Weyl transformations, in (2.23). A more
precise construction of the path integral is based on gauge fixing through the Faddeev-Popov
procedure, as follows.
  10
    Henceforth we will often omit the superscript E for the Euclidean action when there is no room for
confusion.



                                                  30
    We will work with a slightly generalized version of the conformal gauge, setting

                                                   gab = ĝab                                    (2.25)

for a suitably chosen fiducial metric ĝab on the worldsheet. Locally, this gauge condition
can be reached by a combination of diffeomorphism and Weyl transformation for any non-
degenerate ĝab . The global issues with the conformal gauge will be addressed in section
4.1.
    Under an infinitesimal diffeomorphism generated by a vector field δv a , combined with an
infinitesimal Weyl transformation parameterized by a function δω, the metric gab transforms
by
                              δgab = −∇a δvb − ∇b δva + 2δωgab .                       (2.26)
The gauge fixed form of (2.23) can be written as a functional integral over the scalar fields
X µ in the background fiducial metric ĝab ,
                                 Z
                                                          E         µ
                           Zĝ = [DX µ ]ĝ ∆FP [ĝab ] e−SP [ĝab ,X ] ,              (2.27)

where ∆FP [ĝab ] is the Faddeev-Popov determinant,
                                     Z
                                                         E
                    ∆FP [ĝab ] = [Debab Dca Dζ]ĝ e−Sgh [ĝ,b,c,ζ] ,
                                                              e

                                            Z                                                    (2.28)
                      E                   1       p
                                                                ˆ a cb + ∇
                                                                         ˆ b ca − 2ĝ ab ζ).
                    Sgh [ĝ, eb, c, ζ] =      d2 σ det ĝ beab (∇
                                         4π

 Here ebab , ca and ζ are anti-commuting fields known as Faddeev-Popov ghosts. In particular,
 ca and ζ carry the same tensor index structure as the gauge parameters δv a and δω, whereas
                                                                           ˆ a is the covariant
beab carries the same index structure as that of the stress-energy tensor. ∇
                                                                     E
derivative with respect to the fiducial metric ĝ. The ghost action Sgh is derived from (2.26)
following the general recipe of section 3.1.
    Note that ζ serves as a Lagrange multiplier and can be integrated out. This results in a
slightly simplified ghost functional integral
                   Z                                                   Z
                             a     −Sgh [ĝ,b,c]    E                1       p
                                                                                         ˆ a cb ,
      ∆FP [ĝab ] = [Dbab Dc ]ĝ e               , Sgh [ĝ, b, c] =      d2 σ det ĝ bab ∇        (2.29)
                                                                    2π
where bab is an anti-commuting symmetric tensor field that is constrained to be traceless,
i.e. ĝ ab bab ≡ 0.
    Consistency of the gauge fixing requires Zĝ to be invariant under formal gauge transfor-
mations of ĝ, or more precisely gauge transformations of the gauge fixing condition gab = ĝab
(as ĝ is not a dynamical field). While the actions SP [ĝ, X] and Sgh [ĝ, b, c] are indeed diffeo-
morphism and Weyl invariant (with the understanding that ĝ is transformed accordingly), it

                                                       31
is not obvious that the measure [DX µ Dbab Dca ]ĝ , which is typically defined with a suitable
UV regularization scheme, would be invariant.
   It is indeed possible to construct a diffeomorphism invariant measure [DX µ Dbab Dca ]ĝ .11
For instance, one may expand the field X µ over an orthonormal basis of eigenfunctions with
respect to the scalar Laplacian in the metric ĝ, and define [DX µ ]ĝ as that of integration
over the coefficient variables with a UV cutoff on the eigenvalues. However, the measure
generally cannot be made Weyl invariant. An important result derived in Appendix E.4 is
that under ĝab → e2ω ĝab , Zĝ transforms by
                                                                             
                                    D − 26
                                           Z     p
                                               2
                                                         ab                 
                Ze2ω ĝ = Zĝ exp             d σ det ĝ ĝ ∂a ω∂b ω + ωR(ĝ) ,        (2.30)
                                      24π
where D is the target Minkowskian spacetime dimension, i.e. the total number of X µ fields,
and R(ĝ) is the Ricci scalar of the fiducial metric.
    According to (2.30), Zĝ is Weyl invariant if and only if D = 26. It is only in this case
that the path integral quantization in the conformal gauge respects the gauge invariance
of the classical Polyakov action. This gives rise to the critical bosonic string theory, whose
worldsheet description involves the free quantum field theory of 26 massless scalar fields X µ
and the ghost fields bab , ca .
    If D ̸= 26, the “anomalous” transformation (2.30) indicates that Weyl invariance does
not hold at the quantum level. Either we must accept that the Weyl mode of the worldsheet
metric is a dynamical field rather than a gauge redundancy, which amounts to an extra
dimension in the target space, or we must modify the Polyakov action in some way so as
to cancel the Weyl anomaly. The former option leads to the so-called noncritical string
theory. The latter option would be the natural choice if we insist that the string propagates
in the D-dimensional Minkowskian spacetime. Indeed, one could add to SP the “composite
Liouville action”
                                  26 − D
                                         Z     p
                   E
                                           d2 σ det g g ab ∂a φ∂b φ − φR(g) ,
                                                                          
                  SCL [gab , φ] =                                                      (2.31)
                                    24π
where φ is any scalar field operator constructed out of X µ and gab that transforms as

                                               φ→φ+ω                                     (2.32)

under the Weyl transformation gab → e2ω gab , so that e−SCL transforms by a factor that
precisely cancels against (2.30). The simplest such choice of φ is
                                           1
                                      φ = − log(g ab ∂a X µ ∂b Xµ ).                     (2.33)
                                           2
 11
      This amounts to the absence of gravitational anomaly.


                                                    32
Formally, the gauge fixed path integral
                                    Z
                               Z = [DX µ ]ĝ ∆FP e−SP −SCL                                                    (2.34)

is Weyl invariant. However, the action SP + SCL is highly non-renormalizable and must be
supplemented with higher-derivative counter terms that are not a priori fixed by symmetry
principles.
    It is interesting to inspect the dynamical consequence of (2.31). In the conformal gauge
gab = ηab , the Lorentzian version of the composite Liouville action can be written as
                               26 − D         (∂a ∂b X µ ∂ b Xµ )(∂ a ∂c X ν ∂ c Xν )
                                       Z
                      SCL = −            d2 σ                                         . (2.35)
                                 24π                    (∂d X ρ ∂ d Xρ )2
A static long string extending in X 1 direction can be described by the classical field con-
figuration X 0 = τ , X 1 = σ,12 with the other components X i set to zero, i = 2, · · · , D − 1.
Expanding around this configuration, we can write
                           26 − D
                                   Z
                  SCL = −             d2 σ(∂a ∂b X i ∂ b X i )(∂ a ∂c X j ∂ c X j ) + · · · , (2.36)
                             96π
where · · · represents higher derivative terms that involve products of more than four fields.
The quartic term exhibited in (2.36) makes a nontrivial contribution to the 2 → 2 S-matrix
element of the X i modes on the long string,
  out
    ⟨k, q3 ; ℓ, q4 |i, q1 ; j, q2 ⟩in = δik δjℓ δ(q1σ − q3σ )δ(q2σ − q4σ ) + δiℓ δjk δ(q1σ − q4σ )δ(q2σ − q3σ )
         i                               (26 − D)α′2 3                                                          (2.37)
      + δ 2 (q1 + q2 − q3 − q4 )                            s δij δkℓ + t3 δik δjℓ + u3 δiℓ δjk + · · · ,
                                                                                               
         s                                    192π
where qi ≡ (qi , qi ) are the momenta of the scattering modes, with qiτ = |qiσ |, and s =
                  τ     σ

−(q1 + q2 )2 , t = −(q1 − q3 )2 , u = −(q1 − q4 )2 are the Mandelstam variables. Note that the
1+1 dimensional kinematics is such that either t or u vanishes.




                            Figure 2: Scattering of ripples on a long string.

   One may be puzzled by how this result could be compatible with the quantization of the
Nambu-Goto action in the static gauge, where there is no obvious analog of the composite-
Liouville action.13 A part of the resolution is that in the Nambu-Goto formulation, for
  12
     This field configuration is viewed as a solution to the equation of motion in the conformal gauge, not to
be confused with the static gauge condition considered in section 2.1.
  13
     According to the derivative counting introduced in section 2.2, the term appearing in (2.36) would appear
to carry weight 2 , but there exists no weight 2 effective coupling that could be added to the Nambu-Goto
action while preserving the target space Poincaré symmetry.


                                                         33
D ̸= 26, the interaction term in the S-matrix element (2.37) arises as a 1-loop contribution.14
Let us further note that in the critical spacetime dimension D = 26, the worldsheet theory
is free in the conformal gauge, whereas the interaction terms in the Nambu-Goto action
produce a nontrivial tree-level scattering phase between the fluctuation modes on a long
string. This is due to the difference in the notion of worldsheet space and time coordinates
between the conformal gauge and the static gauge, which leads to a overall phase difference
known as “gravitational dressing” between the S-matrix elements in the two gauges.


2.5     Critical string theory

Let us now focus on the D = 26 case, where the gauge-fixed path integral (2.27) based on
the Polyakov action alone is consistent with the underlying diffeomorphism and Weyl gauge
invariance. In principle, the quantum state of a closed string may be described in terms of a
wave functional of the fields X µ , bab , and ca on a spatial circle of the worldsheet. We will see
in Chapter 3 that not all such states should be regarded physical, and that the precise notion
of physical states will be defined in terms of BRST cohomology classes. For now, we will
seek an alternative gauge choice in which the ghosts are non-dynamical, so that the physical
states can simply be identified with those of the dynamical fields. This can be achieved in
the light cone gauge, defined by
                                                1
                                τ = X + ≡ √ (X 0 + X 1 ),
                                                 2                                          (2.38)
                                                            ττ
                                det g = −1, gσσ = −g = 1.
The first condition identifies the worldsheet time τ with a light-like coordinate X + . The
second line provides two more functions worth of conditions that are needed to fix the gauge
(almost) completely.
   Under the diffeomorphism and Weyl transformation that gave rise to (2.26), the gauge
conditions (2.38) vary according to
                           δX + = −δv a ∂a X + = −δv τ ,
                           (det g)−1 δ(det g) = g ab δgab = −2∇a δv a + 4δω,                           (2.39)
                           δgσσ = 2δωgσσ − 2∇σ δvσ .
  14
    To carry out this computation requires employing a UV regularization scheme that respects the target
space Poincaré symmetry, such as dimensional regularization, and including necessary counter terms. A
subtlety is the following: if we take the worldsheet dimension to be d = 2 − ϵ, the 1-loop amplitude of
Nambu-Goto theory would also receive a log divergence proportional to stu, which must be canceled by a
d-dimensional Einstein-Hilbert counter term (which is no longer topological as d ̸= 2). After canceling the
divergences, one can then take the d → 2 limit, where the kinematics is such that stu vanishes identically, and
recover a finite contribution that is identical to the second line of (2.37). For further details see Dubovsky,
Flauger, Gorbenko, JHEP 09 (2012), 044 [6].

                                                      34
Following the Faddeev-Popov procedure, the gauge parameters δv a and δω lead to ghosts
ca and η, whereas the variations of the gauge conditions (2.39) correspond to b-type ghosts,
which we denote by b1 , b2 , b3 . The ghost action that follows from (2.39) is
                        Z
                     1
             Sgh =           dτ dσ (−b1 cτ + b2 (−2∇a ca + 4η) + b3 (2η − 2∇σ cσ )) . (2.40)
                    4π
Integrating out b1 , b2 sets cτ = 0 and η = 21 ∇a ca . The remaining ghosts b3 and cσ are non-
dynamical as their τ -derivatives do not appear in the action. We conclude that the ghost
fields play no role in the light cone gauge. After imposing (2.38), the Polyakov action can
be expressed as                     Z
                                1                τa       −     ab       i       i
                                                                                   
                      SP = −          dτ dσ −2g     ∂ a X   + g    ∂ a X   ∂ b X     ,  (2.41)
                               4πα′
where X − ≡ √12 (X 0 − X 1 ), and the index i is summed from 2 to D − 1.
    To describe the worldsheet of a closed string, we should take the spatial coordinate σ to
be a periodic variable. A priori, the periodicity of σ has no intrinsic meaning and could be
τ -dependent. In the light cone gauge, however, we will see below that the periodicity of σ is
in fact a conserved quantity. In any case, we can decompose X − (τ, σ) into its Fourier modes
in σ, and integrate out the nonzero modes which appear linearly in (2.41), setting

                                         ∂σ g τ σ = 0.                                 (2.42)

Note that the light cone gauge condition (2.38) still leaves a residual unfixed gauge trans-
formation, namely a diffeomorphism (σ, τ ) 7→ (σ ′ , τ ′ ) with

                                  σ ′ = σ + f (τ ),    τ ′ = τ.                        (2.43)

This transformation can now be used to set g τ σ , already made σ-independent by (2.42), to
zero. This leaves (2.43) with f (τ ) = const as the only residual gauge redundancy. The light
cone gauge condition (2.38) combined with g τ σ = 0 now determines gab = ηab .
    From the worldsheet standpoint, the spacetime translation symmetry amounts to the
shift symmetry in X µ , whose associated Noether current is
                                               1
                                      jaµ =        ∂a X µ .                            (2.44)
                                              2πα′
The corresponding conserved charge
                                               I
                                         µ
                                        p =         dσjτµ                              (2.45)

is the spacetime momentum of the string. In particular, it follows from the identification
X + = τ that                                 I
                                   +      1
                                  p =           dσ.                                 (2.46)
                                        2πα′

                                               35
                                                                          H
Namely, the lightcone momentum p+ is equal to the circumference ℓ = dσ of the string in
                                                           1
the light cone gauge multiplied by the string tension T = 2πα ′ . In addition,

                                                I
                             −             1
                           p = −p+ =          ′
                                                  dσ∂τ X −
                                      I 2πα                                      (2.47)
                                   1              i 2       i 2
                                                                  
                               =         dσ (∂τ X ) + (∂σ X )
                                 4πα′

where the equality in the second line follows from the equation of motion for g τ τ ,15 coincides
with the worldsheet Hamiltonian in the light cone gauge.
    The Hilbert space of a single closed string can now be constructed as that of the D − 2
free bosons X i , subject to the aforementioned residual diffeomorphism gauge redundancy of
constant shift in σ. This gauge redundancy should be implemented as a further restriction
on the quantum states, namely all physical states must be invariant with respect to the
translation symmetry in σ. That is, all physical states of the closed string must carry zero
total worldsheet momentum.
   The Hilbert space of the free massless scalar fields X i on the σ-circle is spanned by Fock
basis states of the form
                                     |pi ; {nik , n
                                                  eik }k≥1 ⟩,                            (2.48)
where nik is the number of massless quanta of X i that carry k units of momenta each around
                nik is the number of quanta that carry −k units of momenta. pi is the spacetime
the circle, and e
momentum in the X i -direction, related to the time-derivative of the zeroth Fourier mode of
X i via                                          I
                                       i     1
                                      p =      ′
                                                   dσ∂τ X i .                             (2.49)
                                           2πα
The worldsheet Hamiltonian (2.47) evaluates to
                                        "D−1                     #
                      −    (pi )2    1   XX
                                                     i    i
                     p =          + ′ +           k(nk + n
                                                         ek ) + A ,                                        (2.50)
                           2p+     αp     i=2 k≥1


where we have used the relation (2.46), and have included a normal-ordering constant A that
appears in the ground state energy
                                                   2πA
                                            E0 =                                           (2.51)
                                                    ℓ
of the free scalar field theory on a circle of circumference ℓ. A priori, the value of A depends
on the regularization scheme used in defining the Hamiltonian (2.47) as a quantum operator.
  15
    As g τ τ is fixed by the light cone gauge condition, the equation of motion for g τ τ is viewed as a constraint
in the classical theory, or a BRST-exact operator, whose expectation values in all physical states vanish, in
the quantum theory.


                                                        36
(2.50) can be viewed as the dispersion relation of a particle propagating in the D-dimensional
Minkowskian spacetime. Lorentz invariance requires such a dispersion to take the form
pµ pµ + m2 = 0 for some mass m that is independent of pµ . It follows that A must be
independent of ℓ, and that E0 is a Casimir energy that is free from local counter term
ambiguities. This Casimir energy can be calculated either by summing up zero point energy
of the oscillator modes of X i and subtracting UV divergence as dictated by the structure
of possible local counter terms, or more elegantly through the conformal transformation
property of the stress-energy tensor (Appendix E.3), giving the result A = − D−2  12
                                                                                     .
   The residual gauge constraint, namely the vanishing of the total worldsheet momentum,
can be expressed as the level-matching condition
                                    D−1
                                    XX                  D−1
                                                        XX
                               N≡              knik =              nik .
                                                                  ke                     (2.52)
                                     i=2 k≥1            i=2 k≥1


The non-negative integer N will be referred to as the (oscillator) level of the state. (2.50) is
then equivalent to the mass-shell relation pµ pµ + m2 = 0, with
                                                       
                                    2    4         D−2
                                  m = ′ N−                .                              (2.53)
                                         α          24

That is, a closed string state (2.48) subject to the level-matching condition (2.52) is that
of a particle carrying energy-momentum pµ in the D-dimensional Minkowskian spacetime,
whose mass m is given by (2.53).
    We have yet to inspect how the internal degrees of freedom of the string states transform
under Lorentz symmetry. This is not at all obvious, as only an SO(D − 2) subgroup of the
SO(1, D − 1) Lorentz group is manifest in the light cone gauge. In particular, the Lorentz
generators J i+ , J i− , J +− do not correspond to any obvious symmetry transformations on the
free scalar fields X i . A related issue is that in the light cone gauge approach thus far we
have not used the assumption D = 26, which would be essential for the equivalence with
the conformal gauge formulation in which the spacetime Lorentz invariance is manifest. For
D ̸= 26, it turns out that the Weyl anomaly manifests itself in the light cone gauge as a
Lorentz anomaly. In this case, one can verify that candidate Lorentz generators J i− built
out of the X i ’s cannot satisfy the Lorentz algebra relation [J i− , J j− ] = 0.
   We can diagnose the Lorentz anomaly more simply by inspecting the level N = 1 states,
which according to (2.48) involve the excitation of a pair of quanta for X i and X j , carrying
−1 and 1 unit of momentum respectively, for i, j = 2, · · · , D − 1. The X i ’s transform in
the vector representation v of SO(D − 2). Restricting to the case of vanishing transverse
momentum, i.e. pi = 0, the level 1 states transform in the tensor representation v ⊗ v of the
SO(D − 2). If D ̸= 26, the N = 1 states have nonzero mass m according to (2.53), and by

                                                37
Lorentz symmetry must organize into a representation of the massive little group SO(D − 1)
that contains the SO(D − 2) as a subgroup. However, there exists no representation of
SO(D − 1) that reduces to v ⊗ v with respect to its SO(D − 2) subgroup, a contradiction.
Therefore, the content of level 1 states can be compatible with the D-dimensional Lorentz
symmetry only if their mass m vanishes, which by (2.53) requires D = 26.
    An immediate issue with the D = 26 critical bosonic string theory is the presence of a
tachyon state at level N = 0, whose mass squared m2 is negative. This signifies an instability
of the vacuum and the breakdown of quantum perturbation theory for interacting strings. It
will turn out that the bosonic string theory admits other, Lorentz non-invariant, backgrounds
that are free of such instability (section 3.8). Regardless, the critical bosonic string theory
will serve as a useful starting point for formulating the scattering theory of strings.




                                              38
3     Quantization of the bosonic string

3.1     BRST quantization

The Becchi-Rouet-Stora-Tyutin (BRST) formalism is a prescription for constructing a con-
sistent quantum gauge theory based on the gauge-fixed path integral with Faddeev-Popov
ghosts. The essential idea is that the notion of gauge invariance of a classical action is
replaced by a fermionic nilpotent global symmetry known as the BRST symmetry. The in-
troduction of ghosts in the path integral formally enlarges the space of quantum states. One
then demands the physical states to be those that are invariant with respect to the BRST
symmetry, and identifies the physical Hilbert space with the space of BRST cohomology.
    We begin with the action S[ϕ] of a classical gauge theory, where ϕ collectively denotes
all fields, that is invariant with respect to infinitesimal gauge transformations of the form
                                         Z
                                    δϕ = dµα ϵα δα ϕ ≡ ϵα δα ϕ.                            (3.1)

Here α is a continuous label that includes the spacetime coordinates. dµα is a suitable
measure on α-space. The gauge parameter ϵα can be viewed as a function in α. When
there is no room for confusion, the integration sign and measure will be omitted in our
notation (a continuous version of Einstein summation convention). The gauge variation δα
acts on composite fields as a differentiation according to Leibniz’s rule, and obeys an (infinite
dimensional) Lie algebra commutation relation

                                           [δα , δβ ] = fαβ γ δγ ,                                   (3.2)

where the structure constants fαβ γ are assumed to be field independent.
    As an example, suppose the gauge symmetry of interest is diffeomorphism. In this case,
the gauge parameter ϵα is a vector field εµ (x), and in particular the label α ≡ (x, µ) consists
of a spacetime coordinate x together with a vector index µ. We can take the measure on
α-space to be the volume form dµα = dd y, and the integration in α to include summation
over the index ρ. A scalar field φ transforms under infinitesimal diffeomorphism as δφ(x) =
−ερ (x)∂ρ φ(x). In the notation of (3.1), this amounts to

                                   δ(y,ρ) φ(x) = −δ d (x − y)∂ρ φ(x).                                (3.3)

The commutator of a pair of diffeomorphisms acts on φ as
 [δ(y,ρ) , δ(z,σ) ]φ(x) = δ d (x − z)∂xσ δ d (x − y)∂ρ φ(x) − (y, ρ ↔ z, σ)
                                                          
                          Z
                        = dd w −δρν δ d (w − z)∂σ δ d (x − y) + δσν δ d (w − y)∂ρ δ d (x − z) δ(w,ν) φ(x),
                                                                                            

                                                                                                     (3.4)

                                                    39
