                                                                                               Binary Stars
                                                                                                                                                                                      C. A. Tout
                                                                                               [For Examples class 1.30-3.30pm Tuesday 15th February]                            Lent Term, 2022

                                                                                               Examples Sheet I


                                                                                               1. A binary star system with a period of 4 yr lies at 200 pc from the Sun. The projected
                                                                                               orbit of each component holding the other fixed is an ellipse. For each star the semi major
                                                                                               axis of the ellipse passes through the companion and the apastron separation is four times
                                                                                               the periastron separation. The semi-major axis subtends 20 mas and the semi-minor axis
                                                                                               8 mas. Find the eccentricity, inclination, semi-major axis and total mass of the system.




Copyright © 2022 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                               2. Two stars of equal surface temperature form an eclipsing binary system. The orbit
                                                                                               is circular. If the stars are spherical and limb-darkening can be ignored, show that both
                                                                                               eclipses are the same depth in magnitudes and that this depth cannot exceed a certain
                                                                                               amount. Find this amount.


                                                                                               3. In a single-lined spectroscopic binary in an eccentric orbit the eccentricity e, the lon-
                                                                                               gitude of periastron ωp , the orbital period P and the semi-amplitude K1 of the radial
                                                                                               velocity of star 1 can be measured. When the unknown inclination of the orbit is i, show
                                                                                               that the mass function defined as

                                                                                                                                         M23 sin3 i         P (1 − e2 )3/2 3
                                                                                                                   F1 (M1 , M2 , i) =                 2 =       2πG
                                                                                                                                                                          K1 ,
                                                                                                                                        (M1 + M2 )

                                                                                               where M1 and M2 are the masses of star 1 and star 2 respectively. Show that the obser-
                                                                                               vations give a lower limit to M2 . How might we set limits on i?


                                                                                               4. A total of N stars are placed at random on the celestial sphere. Show that the probability
                                                                                               distribution for the angular separation of nearest neighbours is

                                                                                                                                     N −1
                                                                                                                        P (θ) dθ =         (sin θ)(1 + cos θ)N −2 dθ.
                                                                                                                                     2N −1
                                                                                               The restricted bright star catalogue contains 4908 objects brighter than V = 6. Of these
                                                                                               114 are doubly bright visual systems with separations less than 3.5 µrad. What would
                                                                                               be the most likely angular separation of any star’s nearest neighbour if all the stars were
                                                                                               single and placed at random? What is the probability that all 114 double stars are simply
                                                                                               random superpositions?




                                                                                                                                               1
                                                                                               5. The Salpeter distribution for stellar masses for the fraction of stars with masses between
                                                                                               M and M + dM takes the form
                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                kM −α ,    M > M0 ,
                                                                                                                                φ(M ) =
                                                                                                                                                0,         M < M0 ,

                                                                                               with α ≈ 2.35.

                                                                                               If the two stars in all binary systems are chosen at random from this distribution show
                                                                                               that, for a mass ratio q > 1, the number of system with mass ration between q and q + dq,
                                                                                               n(q) dq ∝ q −α dq. What is the distribution of q for q < 1?




Copyright © 2022 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                               6. Suppose Newton’s law for the force between two point masses of total mass M and
                                                                                               separation r is perturbed to

                                                                                                                                                  GM
                                                                                                                                        r̈ = −        r + f.
                                                                                                                                                   r3

                                                                                               Show that the energy E, specific angular momentum h and Laplace-Runge-Lenz vector e
                                                                                               change according to

                                                                                                                Ė = µṙ.f ,   ḣ = r × f    and       GM ė = f × h + ṙ × (r × f ),

                                                                                               where µ = M1 M2 /M is the reduced mass and M1 and M2 the individual masses of the
                                                                                               stars.


                                                                                               7. Show that in a frame in which all the material is corotating with angular velocity Ω the
                                                                                               equation of hydrostatic equilibrium of a star can be written as

                                                                                                                                            ∇P = −ρ∇φ


                                                                                               for pressure P, density ρ and combined gravitational and centrifugal potential φ(r) which
                                                                                               satisfies


                                                                                                                                      ∇2 φ = 4πGρ − 2Ω2 .

                                                                                               Show that P and ρ must be constant on equipotential surfaces. Hence deduce that ∇2 φ,
                                                                                               but not necessarily |∇φ|, constant on equipotential surfaces.

                                                                                               Argue that, for a star of uniform composition, temperature T is also constant on equipo-
                                                                                               tential surfaces.

                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                               The star is in radiative equilibrium with heat flux
                                                                                                                                                       dT
                                                                                                                                F = −χ∇T = −χ             ∇φ,
                                                                                                                                                       dφ
                                                                                               where χ is the conductivity which is related to the opacity κ(ρ, T ) by
                                                                                                                                             4acT 3
                                                                                                                                        χ=          ,
                                                                                                                                              3κρ
                                                                                               where a is the radiation constant and c is the speed of light. Show that the effective
                                                                                               temperature on the surface of the star

                                                                                                                                        Te ∝ g 1/4 ,




Copyright © 2022 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                               where g is the magnitude of the effective gravitational acceleration. Sketch the cross-section
                                                                                               of a rapidly rotating star and indicate where it is hottest.

                                                                                               Why is it not in general possible for the energy balance to be given simply by

                                                                                                                                        ∇.F = ρǫ,

                                                                                               where ǫ(ρ, T ) is the energy generation rate per unit mass?

                                                                                               Now suppose that there is a steady circulation velocity field v(r) so that the energy balance
                                                                                               is given instead by
                                                                                                                                   ds
                                                                                                                                ρT    = ρv.T ∇s = ρǫ − ∇.F,
                                                                                                                                   dt
                                                                                               where s(ρ, T ) is the specific entropy. Use continuity and the thermodynamic relation
                                                                                                                                                     1
                                                                                                                                    T ds = dh −        dP,
                                                                                                                                                     ρ
                                                                                               where h(ρ, T ) is the specific enthalpy, to show that
                                                                                                                                    Z          Z
                                                                                                                                       F.dS =     ρǫ dV,
                                                                                                                                    S            V

                                                                                               where S is an equipotential surface enclosing volume V .

                                                                                               Hence show that the radiative gradient is given by

                                                                                                                                                    Ω2 V
                                                                                                                                                        −1
                                                                                                                      d log T       3κP L
                                                                                                                              =                 1−           ,
                                                                                                                      d log P   16πacGmT 4         2πGm
                                                                                               where L is the rate of energy generation within V and m is the mass in V .
                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                    Ω V
                                                                                               Estimate the factor 2πGm   at (a) the surface and (b) the centre of one component of an
                                                                                               equal-mass binary system consisting of two stars like the Sun whose central density ρc ≈ ρ̄,
                                                                                               where ρ̄ is the mean density, when the components are just filling their Roche lobes and
                                                                                               comment.

                                                                                                                                             3
