                                                                                               Astrophysical Fluid Dynamics                                   Part III Mathematics/Astrophysics
                                                                                               Professor Gordon Ogilvie                                                         Lent Term 2021


                                                                                                                                        Example Sheet 2

                                                                                               1. Validity of the ideal MHD equations

                                                                                               (a) Ohm’s Law for a medium of electrical conductivity σ is J = σE, where E is the electric
                                                                                               field measured in the rest frame of the conductor. Show that, in the presence of a finite
                                                                                               and uniform conductivity, the ideal induction equation is modified to




Copyright © 2020 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                                      ∂B
                                                                                                         = ∇ × (u × B) + η∇2 B ,
                                                                                                      ∂t
                                                                                               where η = 1/(µ0 σ) is the magnetic diffusivity. Hence argue that the effects of finite
                                                                                               conductivity are small if the magnetic Reynolds number Rm = LU/η is large, where L
                                                                                               and U are characteristic scales of length and velocity for the fluid flow.1

                                                                                               (b) Three effects neglected in a non-relativistic theory of MHD are (i) the displacement
                                                                                               current in Maxwell’s equations (compared to the electric current), (ii) the bulk electro-
                                                                                               static force on the fluid (compared to the magnetic Lorentz force) and (iii) the electrostatic
                                                                                               energy (compared to the magnetic energy). Verify the self-consistency of these approx-
                                                                                               imations by using order-of-magnitude estimates or scaling relations to show that these
                                                                                               three neglected effects are all smaller than those retained by a factor of order U 2 /c2 . [You
                                                                                               may wish to consult Jackson, Classical Electrodynamics (Wiley), or a similar book.]

                                                                                               2. Equilibrium of a solar prominence

                                                                                               A simple model for a prominence or filament in the solar atmosphere involves a two-
                                                                                               dimensional magnetostatic equilibrium in the (x, z) plane with uniform gravity g = −g ez .
                                                                                               The gas is isothermal, with isothermal sound speed cs . The density and magnetic field
                                                                                               depend only on x and the field lines become straight as |x| → ∞.
                                                                                               Show that the solution is of the form

                                                                                                      Bz = B0 tanh(kx) ,

                                                                                               where k is a constant to be determined. Sketch the field lines and find the density
                                                                                               distribution.




                                                                                                  1
                                                                                                   The magnetic diffusivity in a fully ionized plasma is on the order of 1013 (T /K)−3/2 cm2 s−1 . Simple
                                                                                               estimates imply that Rm ≫ 1 for observable solar phenomena.

                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                               3. Equilibrium of a magnetic star

                                                                                               A star contains an axisymmetric and purely toroidal magnetic field B = B(r, z) eφ , where
                                                                                               (r, φ, z) are cylindrical polar coordinates. Show that the equation of magnetostatic equi-
                                                                                               librium can be written in the form
                                                                                                                           B
                                                                                                     0 = −ρ∇Φ − ∇p −           ∇(rB) .
                                                                                                                          µ0 r
                                                                                               Assuming that the equilibrium is barotropic such that ∇p is everywhere parallel to ∇ρ,
                                                                                               show that the magnetic field must be of the form
                                                                                                        1




Copyright © 2020 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                                     B = f (r2 ρ) ,
                                                                                                        r
                                                                                               where f is an arbitrary function. Sketch the topology of the contour lines of r2 ρ in a star
                                                                                               and argue that a magnetic field of this form is confined to the interior.

                                                                                               4. Helicity

                                                                                               The magnetic helicity in a volume V is
                                                                                                         Z
                                                                                                    Hm =     A · B dV .
                                                                                                             V

                                                                                               A thin, untwisted magnetic flux tube is a thin tubular structure consisting of the neigh-
                                                                                               bourhood of a smooth curve C, such that the magnetic field is confined within the tube
                                                                                               and is parallel to C.

                                                                                               (a) Consider a simple example of a single, closed, untwisted magnetic flux tube such that

                                                                                                     B = B(r, z) eφ ,

                                                                                               where (r, φ, z) are cylindrical polar coordinates and B(r, z) is a positive function localized
                                                                                               near (r = a, z = 0). The tube is contained entirely within V . Show that the magnetic
                                                                                               helicity of this field is uniquely defined and equal to zero.

                                                                                               (b) Use the fact that Hm is conserved in ideal MHD to argue that the magnetic helicity
                                                                                               of any single, closed, untwisted and unknotted flux tube contained within V is also zero.

                                                                                               (c) Consider a situation in which V contains two such flux tubes T1 and T2 . Let F1 and
                                                                                               F2 be the magnetic fluxes associated with T1 and T2 . By writing B = B1 + B2 , etc., and
                                                                                               assuming that the tubes are thin, show that

                                                                                                     Hm = ±2F1 F2

                                                                                               if the tubes are simply interlinked, while Hm = 0 if they are unlinked.




                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                               5. Variational principles

                                                                                               The magnetic energy in a volume V bounded by a surface S is
                                                                                                         Z
                                                                                                             B2
                                                                                                    Em =         dV .
                                                                                                           V 2µ0



                                                                                               (a) Making use of the representation B = ∇ × A of the magnetic field in terms of a
                                                                                               magnetic vector potential, show that the magnetic field that minimizes Em , subject to
                                                                                               the tangential components of A being specified on S, is a potential field. Argue that this
                                                                                               constraint corresponds to specifying the normal component of B on S.




Copyright © 2020 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                               (b) Making use of the representation B = ∇α × ∇β of the magnetic field in terms
                                                                                               of Euler potentials, show that the magnetic field that minimizes Em , subject to α and
                                                                                               β being specified on S, is a force-free field. Argue that this constraint corresponds to
                                                                                               specifying the normal component of B on S and also the way in which points on S are
                                                                                               connected by magnetic field lines.


                                                                                               Answers to questions 1 and 2 may be submitted for marking.
                                                                                               Please send any comments and corrections to gio10@cam.ac.uk




                                                                                                                                           3
