                                                                                               Structure and Evolution of Stars
                                                                                                                                                                                   C. A. Tout
                                                                                               [For Examples class 1.30-3.30pm Monday 26th January 2026]                Michaelmas Term, 2025

                                                                                               Examples Sheet IV


                                                                                               1. Two stars of equal surface temperatures form an eclipsing binary system. The orbit
                                                                                               is circular. If the stars are spherical and limb-darkening can be ignored, show that both
                                                                                               eclipses are the same depth (in magnitudes) and that this depth cannot exceed a certain
                                                                                               amount.




Copyright © 2025 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                               2. In a single-lined spectroscopic binary with a circular orbit the only measurable param-
                                                                                               eters are the orbital period P and the semi-amplitude K1 of the radial velocity of star 1.
                                                                                               If the (unknown) inclination of the orbit is i, show that the mass function defined as

                                                                                                                                                  M23 sin3 i
                                                                                                                             F (M1 , M2 , i) =                  2
                                                                                                                                                 (M1 + M2 )

                                                                                               can be determined from the observations. Here M1 and M2 are the masses of star 1 and
                                                                                               star 2 respectively. Show that for given i, the observations give a lower limit to M2 . How
                                                                                               might we set limits on i?


                                                                                               3. Two stars of masses M1 and M2 move in circular orbits about their centre of gravity.
                                                                                               What is (i) the orbital angular momentum h1 of star 1 and (ii) the total orbital angular
                                                                                               momentum h, in terms of the masses and the orbital period P ?
                                                                                               Wind from star 1 reduces M1 at a rate which is steady and slow compared with P . The
                                                                                               wind leaves the stellar surface in a spherically symmetric manner and can be assumed not
                                                                                               to interact with star 2. Justify briefly the equation

                                                                                                                                             h1
                                                                                                                                      ḣ =      Ṁ1
                                                                                                                                             M1

                                                                                               for the evolution of total orbital angular momentum and show that this implies
                                                                                                                                                      −2
                                                                                                                                  P ∝ (M1 + M2 )           .


                                                                                               Now suppose that (a) a constant fraction f of the mass lost from star 1 is accreted by star
                                                                                               2, (b) the remaining 1 − f escapes to infinity with the same specific angular momentum as
                                                                                               before and (c) the intrinsic spin of both components remains negligible compared to the
                                                                                               orbital angular momentum. Show that the variation of P is now given by
                                                                                                                                                               −2
                                                                                                                            P ∝ M1−3f M2−3 (M1 + M2 )               .

                                                                                                                                             1
                                                                                               Discuss qualitatively the validity of each of assumptions (a) to (c) and in particular their
                                                                                               possible dependence on orbital separation (relative to star size) and on wind velocity
                                                                                               (relative to orbital velocity).

                                                                                               Finally, suppose that the period is so long, perhaps 106 − 107 yr, that the mass loss by
                                                                                               stellar wind takes place in a time which is short compared with the orbital period. Without
                                                                                               detailed calculation, what would you expect the effect on the orbit to be?


                                                                                               4. In a semi-detached binary, with conservative Roche lobe overflow (RLOF), show that
                                                                                               the radius a of the orbit satisfies
                                                                                                                                        (1 + q)4
                                                                                                                                    a∝           ,
                                                                                                                                           q2




Copyright © 2025 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                               where q is the mass ratio of the two components (loser/gainer). In a certain range of mass
                                                                                               ratios, the radius of the Roche lobe around the loser can be approximated by

                                                                                                                                     RL ≈ 0.4aq 2/9 .

                                                                                               Show that as the loser, of mass m, transfers mass to its companion, its Roche-lobe radius
                                                                                               changes at a rate
                                                                                                                                d loge RL     d loge m
                                                                                                                                           =α          ,
                                                                                                                                    dt             dt
                                                                                               where
                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                    α = 20
                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                                                                         9  q −  5 .


                                                                                               A star of mass M and age t has a radius R which changes in response to internal nuclear
                                                                                               evolution and to variation in mass (provided the variation is slow), according to

                                                                                                                               loge R = β loge M + t/tnuc ,

                                                                                               where β, the slope of the ZAMS radius-mass relation and tnuc , the nuclear timescale, can
                                                                                               be taken as constant. As long as R < RL the mass m remains constant but once R > RL
                                                                                               mass starts to flow at a rate given by
                                                                                                                               d loge M      1       R
                                                                                                                                        =−      loge    ,
                                                                                                                                   dt      tdyn      RL
                                                                                               where tdyn is the dynamical timescale, also constant (tdyn ≪ tnuc ) .

                                                                                               Define f = loge (R/RL ). As long as f is negative show that it satisfies the differential
                                                                                               equation
                                                                                                                                       df      1
                                                                                                                                          =
                                                                                                                                       dt    tnuc
                                                                                               and find a corresponding first-order linear differential equation satisfied by f when it is
                                                                                               positive. Show that, as long as β > α, f tends to a small constant positive value,
                                                                                                                                            1 tdyn
                                                                                                                                    f→               ,
                                                                                                                                          β − α tnuc

                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                               with steady mass transfer on a nuclear timescale, but that if β < α then f grows expo-
                                                                                               nentially on a dynamical timescale.

                                                                                               On the lower main sequence β ≈ 1, while on the upper main sequence β ≈ 0.5. Find the
                                                                                               corresponding ranges of initial mass ratio q0 for which mass transfer can proceed steadily,
                                                                                               on a nuclear timescale, once the primary has filled its Roche lobe.


                                                                                               5. For mass ratio q between 0.2 and 2 the ratio of Roche-lobe radius to orbital separation
                                                                                               is given sufficiently accurately by

                                                                                                                                    RL
                                                                                                                                       = 0.38q 0.25 .




Copyright © 2025 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                                                                     a

                                                                                               When a star transfers mass conservatively to a companion in a close binary show that the
                                                                                               radius of the loser is a minimum when q = 79 .
                                                                                               Such a loser is a white dwarf whose radius R∗ is given in terms of its mass M by
                                                                                                                                                     − 13
                                                                                                                                 R∗              M
                                                                                                                                    = 0.01                    ,                       (†).
                                                                                                                                 R⊙              M⊙

                                                                                                                                                                              17
                                                                                               Show that Roche-lobe overflow must be on a rapid hydrodynamic timescale if q > 27 but
                                                                                               that it can be on a slower timescale otherwise.

                                                                                               A binary system with a period of 0.1 d consists of two white dwarfs of different mass,
                                                                                               both in the range 0.2 − 1 M⊙ , for which you may assume (†) applies. Given that the Sun
                                                                                               would fill its Roche lobe in a binary with period of about 0.3 d, estimate the period at
                                                                                               which the double-white-dwarf binary would fill its Roche lobe. Which component would
                                                                                               reach its lobe first? What physical process or processes might bring about the necessary
                                                                                               decrease in period within the Galactic lifetime? What would you expect to be the outcome
                                                                                               of Roche-lobe overflow if the white dwarfs’ masses are (a) 0.2 + 0.5 M⊙ , (b) 0.5 + 1.0 M⊙
                                                                                               and (c) 0.6 + 0.7 M⊙ .


                                                                                               6. A supergiant of C/O core mass Mc and envelope mass Menv , for which the binding
                                                                                               energy may be expressed as
                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                       2GMenv
                                                                                                                               Ebind ≈        ,
                                                                                                                                         RG
                                                                                               where RG is a fiducial radius defined by
                                                                                                                                                2              − 13
                                                                                                                           RG               Mc          Menv
                                                                                                                              ≈ 1,000                                     ,
                                                                                                                           R⊙               M⊙          M⊙

                                                                                               is in a binary with a C/O white dwarf of mass Mwd .

                                                                                                                                             3
                                                                                               The giant fills its Roche lobe and dynamical mass transfer leading to common-envelope
                                                                                               evolution ensues. Show that, if the common envelope efficiency is αce , the final separation
                                                                                               of the cores when the envelope has been lost is af , where

                                                                                                                                     af   αce Mc Mwd
                                                                                                                                        ≈        2
                                                                                                                                     RG    2 Menv

                                                                                               in the limit af ≪ ai , the initial separation.
                                                                                               The radius of a white dwarf of mass Mwd can be approximated by
                                                                                                                                                              31
                                                                                                                                   Rwd                  M⊙




Copyright © 2025 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                                                                       ≈ 0.01
                                                                                                                                   R⊙                   Mwd

                                                                                               and the radius of the hot giant core by

                                                                                                                                   Rc (Mc ) ≈ 5Rwd (Mc ) .

                                                                                               The spiralling cores coalesce if af ≤ 3 max (Rwd , Rc ). Estimate the minimum envelope mass
                                                                                               Mcrit required for the cores to coalesce if Mc = 0.6 M⊙ , Mwd = 0.9 M⊙ and αce = 1.0.
                                                                                               Suppose the process of coalescence heats the degenerate white dwarf and the supergiant
                                                                                               core to a temperature at which carbon burning 12 C+12 C → 24 Mg, (13.93 MeV per reaction)
                                                                                               can ignite. Estimate the total nuclear energy that can be released and compare it with the
                                                                                               binding energy of the white dwarf which may be modelled as an n = 3/2 polytrope.
                                                                                               Comment on the result for Menv in the range from well below to well above Mcrit .




                                                                                                                                                4
