                                                                                                                                      Problem Set 3
                                                                                                                                         Structure Formation




                                                                                               Warmup Questions

                                                                                                (a) How do density perturbations in a pressureless fluid grow (i) in a static space




Copyright © 2017 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                                    and (ii) in an expanding space?

                                                                                                (b) Explain the Mészáros effect.

                                                                                                (c) Explain the assumptions that go into the Press-Schechter mass function




                                                                                               1. Newtonian Structure Formation
                                                                                               In class we derive evolution equations for the perturbations from GR but on subhorizon scales
                                                                                               we can use a Newtonian treatment. Consider the equations of fluid dynamics in the presence of
                                                                                               a gravitational potential:
                                                                                                                                        ∂ρ
                                                                                                                       continuity          + ∇r ·(ρu) = 0 ,
                                                                                                                                        ∂t
                                                                                                                                    ∂u               1
                                                                                                                       Euler           + (u · ∇r )u + ∇r P + ∇r Φ = 0 ,
                                                                                                                                    ∂t               ρ
                                                                                                                       Poisson        ∇2r Φ = 4πGρ .

                                                                                                (a) Show that the homogeneous expanding universe corresponds to the following solution

                                                                                                                                   ρ̄(t0 )            ȧ                 4πG
                                                                                                                         ρ̄(t) =           ,   ū =      r,    ∇r Φ̄ =       ρ̄r .
                                                                                                                                   a3 (t)             a                   3

                                                                                                (b) Consider linear perturbations about the homogeneous solution. Show that the density
                                                                                                    perturbations satisfy
                                                                                                                                        2 2        
                                                                                                                                 ȧ     cs k
                                                                                                                           δ̈ + 2 δ̇ +       − 4πGρ̄ δ = 0 ,   (⋆)
                                                                                                                                 a       a2

                                                                                                    where δ ≡ δρ/ρ̄ and c2s ≡ δP/δρ.

                                                                                                (c) How does (⋆) have to be modified in order to describe the evolution of dark matter per-
                                                                                                    turbations in our universe? Find the solutions to this new equation (i) during radiation
                                                                                                    domination, (ii) during matter domination, and (iii) during dark energy domination.
                                                                                                    [Hint: First explain why you may ignore perturbations in the radiation and the dark energy.]
                                                                                               2. Growth of Matter Perturbations I: Early Times
                                                                                               At early times, the universe was dominated by radiation (r) and pressureless matter (m). You
                                                                                               may ignore baryons.

                                                                                                (a) Show that the conformal Hubble parameter satisfies

                                                                                                                                       H02 Ω2m 1
                                                                                                                                                        
                                                                                                                                    2                  1
                                                                                                                                  H =              +       ,
                                                                                                                                         Ωr     y y2




Copyright © 2017 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                                    where y ≡ a/aeq is the ratio of the scale factor to its value when the energy density of the
                                                                                                    matter and radiation are equal.

                                                                                                (b) Describe qualitatively the behaviour of the Newtonian-gauge fractional density perturba-
                                                                                                    tions δr and δm for a scalar perturbation at scale k, with adiabatic initial conditions, that
                                                                                                    re-enters the Hubble radius well before aeq .

                                                                                                (c) For perturbations on scales much smaller than the Hubble radius, the fluctuations in the
                                                                                                    radiation can be neglected. Assuming that Φ evolves on a Hubble timescale, show that

                                                                                                                               δm′′ + Hδm′ − 4πGa2 ρ̄m δm ≈ 0 .    (⋆)

                                                                                                (d) Show that, in terms of the variable y, eq. (⋆) becomes

                                                                                                                            d2 δm    2 + 3y dδm        3
                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                                                                  +              −           δm = 0 .
                                                                                                                             dy     2y(1 + y) dy   2y(1 + y)

                                                                                                    Hence verify that the solutions are
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                  2 + 3y
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                         δm ∝                  √       
                                                                                                                                                  1+y+1     p
                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                  (2 + 3y) ln  √         −6 1+y
                                                                                                                                                  1+y−1
                                                                                                                                

                                                                                                    Determine how δm grows with y for y ≪ 1 (RD) and y ≫ 1 (MD).


                                                                                               3. Growth of Matter Perturbations II: Late Times
                                                                                               At late times, the universe is dominated by pressureless matter (m) and dark energy (Λ). As-
                                                                                               suming that the dark energy doesn’t cluster, the gravitational potential is only sourced by the
                                                                                               matter.

                                                                                                (a) Use the Einstein equations to show that the comoving-gauge matter density contrast, ∆m ≡
                                                                                                    δm − 3Hvm , evolves as
                                                                                                                                 ∆′′m + H∆′m − 4πGa2 ρ̄m ∆m = 0 .




                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                (b) Show that u ≡ ∆m /H satisfies
                                                                                                                                  d2 u    d ln(aH) du
                                                                                                                                       +3               = 0.
                                                                                                                                  da2         da   da
                                                                                                    Confirm that the decaying mode is ∆m ∝ H, while the growing mode can be written as
                                                                                                                                              Z ai
                                                                                                                                                    dã
                                                                                                                                     ∆m ∝ H               .
                                                                                                                                                        3
                                                                                                                                               a (ãH̃)




Copyright © 2017 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                                (c) What are the growing and decaying modes of ∆m in the matter-dominated era? What is
                                                                                                    the asymptotic limit (a → +∞) of the growing mode solution in the dark energy-dominated
                                                                                                    era?


                                                                                               4. Matter Power Spectrum In class we used the evolution of ∆m to calculate the matter power
                                                                                               spectrum we observe in terms of the power spectrum of ζ. Reproduce the argument but using
                                                                                               δm instead of ∆m to obtain the same result.

                                                                                               5. Spherical Collapse of Radiation Suppose we wanted to get an idea of how radiation density
                                                                                               perturbations evolved during the radiation era. We could try to naively repeat our arguments
                                                                                               regarding spherical collapse of dark matter but with radiation. If we make a overdensity of
                                                                                               radiation by compressing a sphere from R to R then we can make the same argument that the
                                                                                               two regions will be gravitationally decoupled but the pressure discontinuity on the boundary will
                                                                                               stop the regions from fully decoupling. However if we consider perturbations which are much
                                                                                               larger than the horizon the information about the pressure discontinuity can’t travel very far into
                                                                                               the interior and the effect can be neglected (this is the separate universe approach which we can
                                                                                               use for superhorizon modes. Where we expect the modes to evolve purely by their modification
                                                                                               of the the local background). Assuming this is the case we can decouple the two regions. Now
                                                                                               the outside is described by;
                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                       ȧ     H 2 Ωr,0    H2
                                                                                                                                           = 0 4 = 40
                                                                                                                                       a         a         a
                                                                                               and the inside by;
                                                                                                                                      2
                                                                                                                                      ȧ   H 2 Ωr,0 K
                                                                                                                                          = 04 − 2
                                                                                                                                      a      a      a
                                                                                               Show that these have solutions
                                                                                                                                             p
                                                                                                                                        a=    2H0 t
                                                                                                                                       R = A sin (θ)
                                                                                                                                        t = B (1 − cos θ)

                                                                                               where you should determine A, B and θ. Now expand the solution for a in terms of θ to show
                                                                                               that at zeroth order

                                                                                                                                             R=R


                                                                                                                                               3
                                                                                                                                  1/4
                                                                                               as we expect (you will need that Ωr,0 = R0 /R0 as the density of radiation goes as a4 rather than
                                                                                               a3 as for matter). Show that at first order the linear density perturbation grow as

                                                                                                                                                Ωr,0 − 1 2
                                                                                                                                       δlinear = p      a ∝t
                                                                                                                                                2 Ωr,0

                                                                                               So we have recovered the result from the previous section that on superhorizon scales ∆r ∝ τ 2 ∝
                                                                                               a2 .




Copyright © 2017 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                               6. Virial Theorem
                                                                                               We used the Virial theorem for non-relativistic gravitating bodies to determine the radius at
                                                                                               which spherical over densities stop collapsing. Here we will prove it. First take the rotational
                                                                                               inertia of the system
                                                                                                                                           X
                                                                                                                                       I=      mi r i · r i
                                                                                                                                                i

                                                                                               where i runs over particles in the system. We define the virial, G, as
                                                                                                                                                      1 dI
                                                                                                                                              G≡
                                                                                                                                                      2 dt
                                                                                               Show
                                                                                                                                        dG        X
                                                                                                                                           = 2K +   Fi · r i
                                                                                                                                        dt
                                                                                                                                                         i
                                                                                                                                                                                            P
                                                                                               where Fi is the force on particle i and K is the total kinetic energy. Now use Fi = j Fij ,
                                                                                               where Fij is the force exerted on particle i by particle j, and that the gravitational force between
                                                                                               particles will be the gradient of the gravitational potential, Fij = −∇Vij , where

                                                                                                                                                      Gmi mj
                                                                                                                                          Vij = −
                                                                                                                                                     |r i − r j |

                                                                                               to show that
                                                                                                                                  X                  XX
                                                                                                                                        Fi · r i =             Vij ≡ V
                                                                                                                                   i                 i   j<i

                                                                                               where V is the total potential energy. Now we have that

                                                                                                                                          1 d2 I
                                                                                                                                                 = 2K + V
                                                                                                                                          2 dt2
                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                               For any stable system we expect ddt2I = 0 (at least when averaged over some finite time scale)
                                                                                               which gives us the virial theorem (for non-relativistic gravitating systems)

                                                                                               7. Halo Formation



                                                                                                                                                     4
                                                                                               One consequence of the virial theorem is that we can estimate the time at which halos formed
                                                                                               from their mass M and their velocity dispersion σv . We know from our discussion of spherical
                                                                                               collapse that

                                                                                                                                        ρvir ≈ 200ρ̄(tvir ) .                                 (*)

                                                                                               Write down expressions for the kinetic energy and potential energy of the halo and use the virial
                                                                                               theorem to show,




Copyright © 2017 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                                                                                      GM
                                                                                                                                          Rvir =           .
                                                                                                                                                       σv2

                                                                                               Now write down the background density at the time of virialisation, ρ̄(tvir ), in terms of Ωm,0 and
                                                                                               zvir and the halo density ρvir in terms of M and Rvir . Then use (*) to show,
                                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                                     −         1       σv
                                                                                                                                        100G H02 Ωm,0 3
                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                           1 + zvir ≤                                   1        .
                                                                                                                                                                       M3
                                                                                               This tells us that low-mass high-velocity objects formed first and high-mass low-velocity objects
                                                                                               formed last. For our galaxy we have σv ≈ 300kms−1 and M ≈ 1012 Msun we find that zvir ≤ 7.
                                                                                               In general it is hard to form anything before z = 10 which defines the cosmological dark ages.




                                                                                                                                                  5
