                                                                                                                                  Problem Set 4
                                                                                                                              Initial Conditions from Inflation




                                                                                               Warmup Problem

                                                                                                (a) Describe g⋆ (T ) given the particle content of the Standard Model.




Copyright © 2015 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                                (b) Why does the neutrino temperature scale as Tν ∝ a−1 after decoupling?

                                                                                                (c) Why is today’s photon temperature larger than that of neutrinos?

                                                                                                (d) Why is the recombination temperature much lower than the ionization energy of hydrogen?



                                                                                               1. Chemical Potential for Electrons

                                                                                                (a) Show that the difference between the number densities of electrons and positrons in the
                                                                                                    relativistic limit (me ≪ T ) is

                                                                                                                                           gT 3 2  µe   µe 3
                                                                                                                                                                
                                                                                                                                ne − n̄e ≈        π     +          ,
                                                                                                                                           6π 2     T      T

                                                                                                    where µe is the chemical potential.
                                                                                                    Hint: You may use that
                                                                                                                                                             π2
                                                                                                                                      Z ∞
                                                                                                                                                       y
                                                                                                                                               dy          =    .
                                                                                                                                          0         ey + 1   12

                                                                                                (b) The electrical neutrality of the universe implies that the number of protons np is equal to
                                                                                                    ne − n̄e . Use this to estimate µe /T .


                                                                                               2. Neutrinos

                                                                                                (a) Massive neutrinos:
                                                                                                    Assume that one neutrino species has a non-zero mass mν which is much smaller than the
                                                                                                    neutrino decoupling temperature Tdec ∼ 1 MeV, so that they are relativistic when they
                                                                                                    decouple. Compute the temperature of the neutrinos relative to the cosmic microwave
                                                                                                    photons and hence estimate their number density. From their assumed mass mν , show that
                                                                                                    the density the neutrinos contribute in the universe corresponds to
                                                                                                                                                         mν
                                                                                                                                              Ων h2 ≈         .
                                                                                                                                                        94 eV
                                                                                                (b) Extra neutrino species:
                                                                                                    Suppose that there was a fourth generation of active neutrinos in addition to νe , νµ , and ντ .
                                                                                                    (This possibility is excluded by the Z lifetime, but you should still be able to do the
                                                                                                    problem.) Compute g⋆ prior to e+ e− annihilation, and g⋆ after e+ e− annihilation. What
                                                                                                    is the final neutron abundance in this case? What will this do to the final 4 He abundance?


                                                                                               3. Relic Baryon Density




Copyright © 2015 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                               Consider massive particles and antiparticles with mass m and number densities n(m, t) and
                                                                                               n̄(m, t). If they interact with cross-section σ at velocity v, explain why the evolution of n(m, t)
                                                                                               is described by
                                                                                                                                  ∂n        ȧ
                                                                                                                                      = −3 n − nn̄hσvi + P (t) ,
                                                                                                                                  ∂t        a
                                                                                               and identify the physical significance of each of the terms appearing in this equation.

                                                                                                (a) By considering the evolution of the antiparticles, show that

                                                                                                                                          (n − n̄)a3 = const.

                                                                                                (b) Assuming initial particle-antiparticle symmetry, show that
                                                                                                                                   1 d(na3 )         h
                                                                                                                                                         2     2
                                                                                                                                                                  i
                                                                                                                                             = −hσvi   n   − n eq   ,
                                                                                                                                   a3 dt
                                                                                                    where neq denotes the equilibrium number density.

                                                                                                (c) Define Y ≡ n/T 3 and x ≡ m/T , and show that
                                                                                                                                    dY     λh          i
                                                                                                                                       = − 2 Y 2 − Yeq
                                                                                                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                                                                    dx     x
                                                                                                    where λ ≡ m3 hσvi/H(T = m). If λ is constant, show that at late times Y approaches a
                                                                                                    value given by
                                                                                                                                                     xf
                                                                                                                                              Y∞ =       ,
                                                                                                                                                      λ
                                                                                                    where xf is the freeze-out time. Explain the dependence of Y∞ on hσvi and sketch the
                                                                                                    schematic evolution of Y versus x for both a strongly and a weakly interacting population
                                                                                                    of annihilating particles and antiparticles. If there was a speed-up in the expansion rate of
                                                                                                    the universe caused by the addition of extra low-mass neutrino species what would happen
                                                                                                    to the abundance of surviving massive particles and why?

                                                                                               Now apply this to proton-antiproton annihilation. You may use that hσvi ≈ 100 GeV−2 .
                                                                                                (d) Show that Tf ≈ 20 MeV.

                                                                                                (e) Show that
                                                                                                                                          n    n̄
                                                                                                                                             =    = 10−19 .
                                                                                                                                          nγ   nγ
                                                                                                    How does this compare with observational data? What do you conclude about the abun-
                                                                                                    dances of protons and antiprotons in the early universe?

                                                                                                                                                2
                                                                                               4. Primordial Nucleosynthesis

                                                                                                (a) Write down an expression which shows the explicit dependence of the nucleon decoupling
                                                                                                    temperature Tdec (and so the neutron-proton ratio Xn /Xp ) on the number of relativistic
                                                                                                    species g⋆ .

                                                                                                (b) Discuss the effect of the following suppositions on the production of 4 He during primordial
                                                                                                    nucleosynthesis:




Copyright © 2015 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                                       1. The baryon density today is larger than we estimate.
                                                                                                       2. The weak interaction constant GF is smaller at nucleosynthesis than it is today.
                                                                                                       3. Newton’s constant G is larger than supposed.
                                                                                                       4. The neutron-proton mass difference was slightly larger than supposed.



                                                                                               5. Mukhanov-Sasaki
                                                                                               In the lectures, we ignored metric fluctuations in deriving the dynamics of the inflaton fluctuations
                                                                                               f ≡ aδφ (in spatially flat gauge). If we had included the metric fluctuations, we would have found
                                                                                               that the Mukhanov-Sasaki equations takes the form
                                                                                                                                             z ′′
                                                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                                                  ′′     2
                                                                                                                                fk + k −            fk = 0 ,    (⋆)
                                                                                                                                              z
                                                                                               where z 2 = 2a2 ε.
                                                                                                (a) Show that at first order in the slow-roll parameters,

                                                                                                                                        1                      z ′′   ν 2 − 41
                                                                                                                                  aH = − (1 + ε)         and        =          ,
                                                                                                                                        τ                       z        τ2
                                                                                                     where ν ≡ 23 + ε + 12 η.

                                                                                                (b) Show that the Bunch-Davies solution of (⋆) is
                                                                                                                                         √
                                                                                                                                           π
                                                                                                                               fk (τ ) =     (−τ )1/2 Hν(1) (−kτ ) ,
                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                              (1)
                                                                                                     where Hν       is a Hankel function of the first kind. You may use that
                                                                                                                                                     r
                                                                                                                                       (1,2)            2 1                    1
                                                                                                                                                               e∓ikτ e∓i 2 (ν+ 2 ) .
                                                                                                                                                                         π
                                                                                                                               lim Hν (−kτ ) =           √
                                                                                                                             kτ →−∞                     π −kτ

                                                                                                (c) Derive the power spectrum of curvature perturbations on superhorizon scales
                                                                                                                                                         1 2
                                                                                                                                                 ∆2R =     ∆ .
                                                                                                                                                         z2 f
                                                                                                     You may use that                                                    −ν
                                                                                                                                                       i            −kτ
                                                                                                                                     lim Hν(1) (−kτ ) = Γ(ν)                    .
                                                                                                                                    kτ →0              π             2


                                                                                                                                                    3
                                                                                               (d) Show that the scale-dependence of the scalar spectrum is

                                                                                                                                            d ln ∆2R
                                                                                                                                 ns − 1 ≡            = −2ε − η .
                                                                                                                                             d ln k
                                                                                                   Write the answer in terms of the potential slow-roll parameters ǫv and ηv .




Copyright © 2015 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.




                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                               6. The Higgs as an Inflaton?
                                                                                               The LHC has recently discovered a Higgs-like scalar particle. It is tempting to ask if the Higgs
                                                                                               field could have been the scalar field that drove inflation.

                                                                                                (a) Let the potential of the Higgs boson be
                                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                       V (φ) = λ φ2 − v 2         ,

                                                                                                    where v = 246 GeV. Sketch the potential and indicate the regions where slow-roll inflation




Copyright © 2015 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                                                                                           2 (V ′ /V )2 and η ≡ M 2 V ′′ /V .
                                                                                                    might occur. Compute the slow-roll parameters ǫv ≡ 21 Mpl                v    pl

                                                                                                (b) First, consider the region 0 < φ < v.
                                                                                                    Sketch ǫv (φ) and ηv (φ) between φ = 0 and φ = v. Is there a region in which both slow-roll
                                                                                                    conditions can be satisfied simultaneously?

                                                                                                (c) Now, look at the regime φ ≫ v.
                                                                                                    Show that ǫv (φ) and ηv (φ) become independent of v. For what field values does inflation oc-
                                                                                                    cur? Determine the field values at the end of inflation (φE ) and N⋆ ∼ 60 e-folds before (φ⋆ ).
                                                                                                    [You may assume that φ⋆ ≫ φE .]
                                                                                                    Compute the amplitude of the power spectrum of scalar fluctuations at φ⋆ . Express your
                                                                                                    answer in terms of N⋆ and the Higgs boson mass mH .
                                                                                                    Estimate the value of mH required to match the observed scalar amplitude ∆2s = 2 × 10−9 .
                                                                                                    Compare this to the announced mass of the Higgs boson, mH = 125 GeV.

                                                                                               (d)∗ Recently, a new version of Higgs inflation has been proposed. Its key ingredient is a non-
                                                                                                    minimal coupling of the Higgs to gravity. The starting point is the following action
                                                                                                                         "                             #
                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                  4 √
                                                                                                                           Mpl           1         λ 4                               φ2
                                                                                                              Z
                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                         S = d x −g            f (φ)R + (∂φ) − φ         ,    where f (φ) ≡ 1 + ξ 2 .
                                                                                                                            2            2         4                                Mpl

                                                                                                    For ξ = 0, this corresponds to the analysis in part (c). Now we want to study ξ ≫ 1. It is
                                                                                                    convenient to define g̃µν ≡ f (φ)gµν , so that the action becomes that of a standard slow-roll
                                                                                                    model                                     "                        #
                                                                                                                                                M 2
                                                                                                                                                         1
                                                                                                                                Z
                                                                                                                                                  pl
                                                                                                                            S = d4 x −g̃             R̃ + (∂Φ)2 − V (Φ) ,
                                                                                                                                       p
                                                                                                                                                 2       2
                                                                                                    with potential
                                                                                                                                      " r           #!
                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                                r
                                                                                                                     λMpl                   2 Φ                         Φ           3
                                                                                                           V (Φ) ≈          1 − 2 exp −                  ,    where         =         ln(f (φ)) .
                                                                                                                     4ξ 2                   3 Mpl                       Mpl         2

                                                                                                    Perform a slow-roll analysis of this potential in the limit Φ ≫ Mpl :

                                                                                                       • Show that the slow-roll parameters are
                                                                                                                                        4 √                           3
                                                                                                                                 ηv = − e− 2/3 Φ/Mpl ,            ǫv = ηv2 .
                                                                                                                                        3                             4

                                                                                                                                               5
                                                                                                       • Show that the scalar spectral index is
                                                                                                                                                           2
                                                                                                                                               ns = 1 −       ,
                                                                                                                                                           N⋆
                                                                                                         and the tensor-to-scalar ratio is
                                                                                                                                                         12
                                                                                                                                                    r=       .
                                                                                                                                                         N⋆2
                                                                                                         How do these predictions compare to the Planck data?




Copyright © 2015 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                                       • By considering the amplitude of scalar fluctuations, determine the required value of
                                                                                                         the non-minimal coupling ξ for λ = O(1).


                                                                                               7. Tensors and the Lyth Bound

                                                                                                (a) Show that the tensor-to-scalar ratio predicted by slow-roll inflation is

                                                                                                                                              ∆2t    8 φ̇2
                                                                                                                                         r≡       =   2 H2 .
                                                                                                                                              ∆2s   Mpl

                                                                                                (b) Show that the inflaton field travels a “distance” ∆φ ≡ |φE −φ⋆ | during (observable) inflation
                                                                                                                                                     r
                                                                                                                                          ∆φ      N⋆    r
                                                                                                                                               =            ,
                                                                                                                                          Mpl     60 0.002

                                                                                                    where N⋆ is the total number of e-folds between the time when the CMB scales exited
                                                                                                    the horizon and the end of inflation. [You may assume that ε ≈ const. during inflation]
                                                                                                    Comment on the implication of this result for observable gravitational waves. [Realistically,
                                                                                                    we require r > 0.001 to have a fighting chance of detecting gravitational waves via CMB
                                                                                                    polarisation.]

                                                                                                (c) Derive the following relationship between the energy scale of inflation, V 1/4 , and the tensor-
                                                                                                    to-scalar ratio,
                                                                                                                                             2       1/4
                                                                                                                                      1/4    3π     2
                                                                                                                                    V     =       r∆s      Mpl .
                                                                                                                                               2
                                                                                                    Use ∆2s = 2.5 × 10−9 to determine V 1/4 for r = 0.01. How does that compare to the energy
                                                                                                    scales probed by the LHC?




                                                                                                                                                6
