382                               22 Anomalies

sati sfy
                                    T,T M = M T' .                      (22.3.4 )
The index n may be replaced with an index r labelling different irreducible
representations of the gauge group, and an index s labelling components
within each irreducible representation, so that

                           ` TO rs,r's' = 5 rr' (TX1 r} ) s,s '         (22.3.41 )
and we write
                                                                        (22.3 .42)
Eq. (22.3 .40) then becomes
                                                                        (22.3 .43 )
(This is not summed over r or r' .) Schur's lemma10 tells us that whenever
the matrices of a pair of irreducible representations are related by such
an equation, the matrix that relates them is either zero or non-singular .
(See Section 5.5.) Thus, either (i) M(r,r') = 0, or else (ii) -T,(r)z and T,( r)
are related by a similarity transformation, and likewise for T# and Ty . In
the latter case the contributions to the anomaly constant (22 .3 .12) from
fermions belonging to the individual irreducible representations r and r'
are related by

                                D(r) _ -D (r)  ,                  (22. 3 . 4.4 )
                                 'fly     xp Y

so the anomaly either vanishes (for r = r') or cancels between the two
representations (for r :~ r') .The anomalies in a given set of symmetries
therefore are unaffected by the possible presence of fermians with a mass
allowed by these symmetries .


   There is a fine point in the use of the Feynman rules to calculate
the three-point function (22 .3 .7), to which we now return. In using the
conventional fermion propagator (22 .3 .9) , we have in effect doubled the
number of fermion fields ; in additional to the purely left-handed fields
&} given by Eq . (22.3.1), the propagator (22.3.9) includes right-handed
modes (unrelated to the fields ( l. - 75 )tp of fermion-number-conserving
theories) that do not interact with the gauge fields. Combining these
non-interacting right-handed fields with the interacting left-handed fields
in a single spinor T, the fermian Lagrangian density is -TPT, where P
is now
                                                     1 + ys
                         ,~ _ ~ --- i¢r aTa              2        (22 .3.4 5)
                     22.4 Anomaly-Free Gauge Theories                      383

The one-loop vacuum functional for spin Z fields interacting with real or
fictitious gauge fields is just Det P . The failure of gauge invariance in this
determinant can be blamed on the fact that the operator (22 .3 .45) is the
sum of two terms
                       P = 0 (1 - Y5 + P(1+75
                                          2                (22 .3 .46)
                                2
of which only the second is gauge-invariant .
  There is another way of looking at anamalies,101 which provides a
framework for calculations of a large class of anomalies, of coordinate
as well as gauge symmetries in spaces of any dimensionality . Instead of
working with the operator (22 .3 .45), which has a well-defined determinant,
one deals instead with just the second term in Eq. (22.3 .46)
                                        ~ + ys
                             PL = P        2          (22.3 .47)

This is perfectly gauge-invariant, but does not have a well-defined deter-
minant, because this operator does not map the space of fermion fields
of one handedness into itself, but rather into the space of fermian fields
of the other handedness . One can try to define a gauge-invariant vac-
uum functional Det PLby writing differential equations for Det PL in the
space of gauge fields, modulo gauge transformations, but then one may
encounter obstructions . There are local obstructions due to violations of
the necessary integrability conditions, which correspond to the anomalies
we have been discussing . Even where these local obstructions are absent,
in cases where the infinite-dimensional space of gauge-field configurations,
modulo gauge transformations, is not simply connected, topological ob-
structions can prevent the definition of single-valued functionals on this
space. Such a global anomaly was found by Witten'0b for the gauge group
SU(2) (which is free of local anomalies) with an odd number of massless
left-handed fermions in SU(2) doublets.



                  22.4 Anomaly-Free Gauge Theorie s

We have calculated the effect of anomalies on the conservation of a general
current R . Where this current is itself coupled to a gauge field, gauge
invariance requires that the anomaly be absent. We saw in the previous
section that the anomaly is proportional to the completely symmetric
constant factor Da#, defined by Eq . ( 22.3 .12) , so for gauge currents we
must havell
384                             22 Anomalies

where Ta is the representation of the gauge algebra on the set of all left-
handed fermion and antifermion fields, and `tr' again denotes a sum over
these ferrnion and antifermian species. This condition may be satisfied
for any gauge group if the fermian fields furnish a suitable reducible or
irreducible representation of the group . In addition, there are some gauge
groups for which Eq . (22 .4.1) is satisfied for fermions in any representation
of the group . 12 (The Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism is used in Section 22 .6
to give a purely algebraic proof that for such gauge groups the anomaly
is absent to all orders of perturbation theory .)
   The condition (22 .4.1 ) is obviously satisfied if the left-handed fermion
(and antifermian) fields furnish a representation of the gauge algebra that
is equivalent to its complex conjugate, in the sense that
                                                      -1
                             OTa ) # = S ( i Ta ) S
or equ i valentl y (since we always take Ta Hermitian)
                                Ta = -S Ta5-1 . (22                       .4.2 )
(Inserting Eq . (22.4 .2) in Eq. (22.3.12) gives Dx#y = -Da#., . ) Such a
representation may be either real, in which case it is possible by a similarity
transformation 7'a = R 7' x R-1 to convert the representation to a form
in which T,,' is imaginary and antisymmetric, or pseudoreal, in which
case this is impossible . (For instance, the three-dimensional irreducible
representation of SU(2) is real, while the two-dimensional representation
is pseudoreal .) There is no anomaly for gauge algebras that have only real
or pseudoreal representations, namely13 S O(2n + 1 ) (including SU(2)
SO(3 )}, S0(4n) for n ~ 2, USp(2n) for n >_ 3, G2, F4, E7 , and fig, and all
of their direct sums . A few other algebras also have only representations
for which Da #,1 vanishes, even though some representations are neither
real nor pseudareal .l2 These are SO(4n + 2) (except for 50 2) = U(1) and
SO(6) = SU(4)) and E6 , and their direct sums with each other and the
above algebras . Anomalies are thus only possible for gauge algebras that
include S U(n) (for n ~ 3) or U(1) factors. As it happens, these are among
the most important gauge algebras in today's physics . The standard model
is based on the gauge group SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1), so we must rely on
cancellations among the quarks and leptons to make the theory free of
anomalies.
   Table 22.1 gives a classification of the left-handed spinor fields of the
first generation of the standard model according to the representations
they furnish of the color S U(3) group and the electroweak SU(2) group,
and the value of the U(1) quantum number y/g' = t3/g - q1e .
   We can now check whether Dx p-, vanishes when T,,, T#, and T., run over
all of the generators of S U ( 3) x S U ( 2 ) x U(1). We need only consider
those combinations of generators for which the product of T, 7'p, and T,1
                      22.4 Anomaly-Free Gauge Theories                             38 5

Table 22.1 . First-generation left-handed fermion and antifermion fields of the
standard model.



            Fermions               S U(3)            S U( 2 )       U M LY1 g ']


                                   3                 2              -1 /6
             U
             d)L

             uR                    3                 1              +2/ 3

             d~                    3                 1              -1/3

             ve
                                   t                 2               1/2
              e   L

             eR                    1                 I               -1




is neutral under S U(3) x S U(2) x U(1), since D ,,#y obviously vanishes for
all the others . We can make invariants out of either zero, two, or three
S U(3) generators (because 8 x 8 and 8 x 8 x 8 both contain singlets), zero,
two, or three S U(2 ) generators, and any number of U(I) generators, so
we only need to check the following cases :
SU(3)-SU(3)-SU(3) :Here Daffy vanishes because the left-handed fermions
furnish a representation 3 + 3 + 3 + 3 + I + I + I of S U(3), which is real .
SU(3)-SU(3)-U(1) : Here the anomaly is proportional t o
                                           1 1       2
                            Ylg              - 6 +3-3=0 .
                                           6
                       33

SU(2 )-S U(2) -SU(2 ) : There is no anomaly here because SU(2) only has
real or pseudoreal representations .
SU(2)--SU(2)-U(1) : Here the anomaly is proportional t o

                                       t
                                  YIg =3      -- ~       + ~ =0 .
                       doublets
386                                    22 Anomalie s

U( 1 )-U( 1 )-U(1 ) : Here the anomaly is proportional t o
                         1   3          ~ 3              1   3    1   3
   X:( Y 1 g ' ) 3 = 6
                         6              3          3              2
   We see that all anomalies cancel for the gauge symmetries of the
standard made1 .13a This result can be neatly understood by noting that
S U( 3 ) x S U( 2) x U(1) may be embedded in SOS 10) .14 All of the repre-
sentations of SO(10) are anomaly-free, so the same property is inherited
by any reducible representation of SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1) that furnishes a
complete representation of SO( 1 0). As it happens, the left-handed fields of
a single generation of quarks, leptons, antiquarks, and antileptons plus one
additional (S U(3) x S U(2) x U(1))-singlet forms a complete 16-dimensional
representation of SO ( 1 0) (the fundamental spinor representation), so for
this set of left-handed fermians there are no S U ( 3 ) x S U( 2 ) x U(1) anoma-
lies. The singlet would not contribute to such anomalies anyway, so there
are no anomalies in the gauge symmetries of the standard model .
  There is one more anomaly that needs to be evaluated . All species of
fermians interact with gravitation in the same way . Calculation of the
fermian loop graph for the expectation value of the current xTy9x (where
x is a column of all left-handed fermion and antifermion fields) in the
presence of an external gravitational field yields an anamaly15 au(xTyYx}
proportional to

                                 tr f TJ'F'"'P'T Rey K ;,R,6 "
In particular, to avoid a gravitational violation of a gauge symmetry like
(22.3.3), the generators must satisfy

                                        trJT,J = D .             (22.4.3)
Like the pure gauge anomaly, this vanishes for gauge generators satisfying
Eq. (22.4.2), so this anomaly receives no contribution from fermions that
form real or pseudoreal representations of the gauge group, and it can
therefore be calculated taking into account only those fermians whose
masses arise from a breaking of the gauge symmetry . Also, this condition
is automatically satisfied by the generators of any simple subalgebras like
SU(2) or SU(3) of the gauge algebra. (trfT,,,J is just a number which
commutes with all the Tp, so if it is non-zero then the algebra is not
simple.) Hence we only need to check that Eq . (22 .4 .3) is satisfied by the
U ( 1) generators of the gauge algebra . In the standard model, the sum of
the values of the weak hypercharge y for all left-handed fermions i s
                           (2)
            ylg r=6(-I) +3     +3(-l) +2(l) +(-l)=05
                     6 3 3               2
so there are no gravitational anomalies in the standard model currents .
                              22.4 Anomaly-Free Gauge Theories                        38 7

   The requirement of vanishing of anomalies may be used as a guide in
formulating realistic theories. For instance, the values of the weak hy-
percharges yfar various SU(3) x SU(2) multiplets were originally taken
from experiment, but one may wonder why these weak hypercharges (and
the corresponding average electric charges in each multiplet) take the ob-
served values. To answer this question, suppose we assign arbitrary weak
hypercharges a, b, c, d, and e to the multiplets ( u L , d L) , uR, dR, ( VL, EL ) ,
and eR, respectively. The conditions for anomaly cancellation tell us that :

SU(3)-SU(3)-U(1) :
                                   T y= 2 Q+ b + c - o
                                    3,3

SU(2)-SU(2)-U(1) :
                                               y=3a +d=Q ;
                                   doublet s

U ( 1 ) -U ( 1 ) -U ( 1 ) :
                              y3 = 6 U3 + 3b 3 + 3 C3 + 2d 3 + e3 = D ;

graviton graviton U(1) :
                              E y = 6a+ 3b + 3c+2d+ e = 0 .
Aside from the possibility of interchanging UR and dR, these equations
have only two solutions, which we may call U(1) and U(1) '
             U( 1)            b/a = -4, c/a = 2, d/a = -3 ,               eta = 6 ,
             U( 1)'           b = -c, a =c=d=e= 0 .
Furthermore, these solutions are exclusive ; we cannot suppose that both
U( ]. ) and U(1)' are local symmetries, because then we would encounter
a U( ]. )'-U( ]. )'-U( 1 ) anomaly proportional to (-4) + (+2) :~ 0 and a
U(1)'-U(1)-U(1) anomaly proportional to (-4)2 - (+2)2 :~ D. The U(1)
generator is just the weak hypercharge of the standard electroweak theory
(with the overall constant factor a absorbed into the definition of g'),
while the U(1)' symmetry resembles nothing observed in nature . This
little calculation provides a rational explanation of the assignment of y
values, or equivalently of electric charges, in the standard model, and it
shows that if all gauge anomalies must cancel within a single generation
of quarks and leptons, then it is not possible to couple a gauge boson to
any other U ( 1) quantum number, in addition to weak hypercharge.
   On the other hand, although it is reasonable to guess that the SU(3 ) x
S U(2) x U ( ]. ) gauge bosons of the standard model may couple only to the
known quarks and leptons (both to explain why no other fermions have
388                                22 Anomalie s

been discovered and to preserve the beautiful cancellation of anomalies in
the standard model), there may be other U(1)' gauge bosons that couple
to other undetected (S U( 3 ) x S U( 2 ) x U(1))-neutral fermions as well as
to the known quarks and leptons . Suppose we denote the U(1)' quantum
numbers y' of the multiplets ( uL, dL ) , uR, dx, (vL, e L) , and eR as a', b',
c', d , and e', respectively . Since we don't know anything about possible
(S U( 3) x S U(2) x U(1))-neutral fermians, the requirement of cancellation
of the U(1)'-U(1)'-U(1)' and graviton graviton-U(1)' anomalies does not
help us to constrain a', h', c', d', or e' . The remaining conditions of
anomaly cancellation tell us that :



                           3, 3




                           doublet s




UM -UMI-001 :
            yyi2 = 6a " + 3(-4 )hi2 + 3(2)c' 2 + 2 (-3 )d'2 + ( 6 )e'2 = 0 .
The general solution has y' a linear combination of y and a quantum
number B - L (where B and L are the conventional baryon and lepton
numbers) that takes values 1/3, -1/3, -1/3, -1, and +1 for the multiplets
(UL, dL ) , uR, dR, K , e d , and eR, respectively . If B - L is a local symmetry,
with a coupling that is not many orders of magnitude smaller than e, then
it must be spontaneously broken, since ordinary bodies have macroscopic
values of B - L . To avoid conflict with observations of neutral currents, the
characteristic scale F of the symmetry breaking would have to be larger
than that of the electroweak interactions, but not necessarily many orders
of magnitude larger . Thus a neutral vector boson somewhat heavier than
the ZO and coupled to B - L seems like the most plausible addition to the
standard model .
   This has all been for a single generation of the standard model . With
three generations there are many more anomaly-free symmetries . One class
of symmetries that are not broken by anomalies or (as far as we know) by
anything else consists of the differences in the numbers of leptons of the
various flavors . Together with B - L, this will be important in Section 23 .5
in classifying the baryon- and lepton-non-conserving processes produced
by anomalies .
                         22.5 Massless Bound States 389

                      22.5 Massless Bound States *

It is sometimes speculated that quarks and leptons may be bound states
of more fundamental particles . If these hypothetical fundamental par-
ticles had asymptotically free gauge interactions, like those in quantum
chromodynamics, then we would expect them to be trapped, which would
explain why they are not observed . However, there is a difficulty with
this picture. Na internal structure of the quarks and leptons has ever
been observed, so the characteristic energy scale A' (analogous to the
A : 200 MeV of quantum chromodynamics) of these gauge interactions
must be very high . For instance, as remarked in Section 12.3, the agree-
ment between theory and experiment for the magnetic moment of the
muon indicates that A' > 3 TeV. But, aside from Goldstone bosons, we
would normally expect the bound states in such a theory to have masses
of order A', or perhaps 2nA', just as in quantum chromodynamics the
proton mass is of order 2nAQCD . This expectation is of course in sharp
contradiction with the fact the observed masses of the quarks and leptons
are much less than A' . To put this problem another way, if the leptons
and quarks are bound states, then why is their size (as measured by
anomalous magnetic moments, etc .) so much smaller than their Compton
wavelengths ?
   One way to answer this question is to suppose that, unlike quantum
chromodynamics, this theory has unbroken chiral symmetries that keep
the quarks and leptons massless, aside from small corrections from other
interactions. In general, a chiral symmetry is any symmetry for which the
massless elementary fields of some given helicity (including the complex
conjugates of the fields of opposite helicity) furnish a complex represen-
tation. By operating on the vacuum with products of the elementary
fields we can construct other states of definite helicity that also furnish
complex representations of these symmetries . If any of these states are
actual composite particles then they must be massless, because all helic-
ity components of the state of a massive particle must furnish the same
representation of any symmetry that commutes with rotations, so a given
helicity component of a particle together with the antiparticle of the op-
posite helicity component would together furnish a real representation . Of
course, it may not be so easy to tell which of the states constructed in this
way correspond to actual composite massless particles, but if they do, their
masslessness is natural, because in order for some massless particles of a
given helicity that belong to a complex representation of the symmetr y


 This section lies somewhat out of the book's main line of development, and may be
 omitted in a first reading .
390                                 22 Anomalie s

group to become massive as we change some parameter of the theory,
their symmetry properties would have to change discontinuously from a
complex to a real representation .
  Although this reasoning shows that there are theories in which it is
natural to have massless or very light composite particles, it does not
give any indication of when this actually happens . The question is an
interesting one, quite apart from the problem of understanding quarks
and leptons as possible composite particles . 't Hoaft1 6 has suggested
a powerful way of answering this question, based on considerations of
anomalies . Briefly, if the underlying theory has global chiral symmetries
(not broken by gauge anomalies, and not spontaneously broken) consisting
of transformations on the elementary left-handed spin z fermions (and
antifermions) x with symmetry generators Ta, Tfl , etc., and if the anomaly
constant tr[I T,,, Tfl I Ty] of these global symmetries is non-zero, then the
spectrum of bound states must include spin z massless particles on
whose left-handed states the same symmetries induce transformations
with generators I a, 17-#, etc ., with the same anomaly constan t
                       tr[ { 9_,, J flj J j = tr[I Ta, Tfl I Ty ] .             (22.5.1 )
   't Hooft's argument was as follows . Imagine that some weakly-
interacting gauge bosons are coupled to generators T, Tp , etc. of the
global symmetries of the underlying theory . Suppose also that although
some of the coefficients D,#,, - tr[t Ta, T~ I Ty] are non-zero, this anomaly
is cancelled by anomalies due to other "spectator' massless fermions, which
do not feel the strong forces that trap the constituents of the composite
particles . Physical processes at energies much less than the characteristic
energy scale A' of the trapping interactions will be described by an effective
Lagrangian in which the trapped fermians do not appear . If the symme-
tries with generators Tx, T#, etc. are not spontaneously broken, then there
are no Goldstone bosons, so the only particles in this effective Lagrangian
will be the weakly coupled gauge bosons and spectator fermians, plus any
massless bound states of the trapped ferrnions and strongly interacting
gauge bosons . The consistency of the effective field theory requires that it
must be anomaly-free, but the spectator fermions by assumption have an
anomaly constant equal to -D ,#1, so there must be massless bound states,
to provide an anomaly constant equal and opposite to this, and hence
equal to that of the original trapped fermians ."* Note that this argumen t


 1 t remains to show that these particles must have spin ? . We are assuming that there
 are no Goldstone bosons here, and that other spinless particles would not naturally be
 massless. The elementary gauge bosons of the theory are assumed neutral under the
 anomalous symmetry transformations, so they could not contribute to the anomaly.
 Composite particles of spin j ~ I are ruled out by a different argumcnt.ls° This is
                           22.5 Massless Bound States 39 1

works no matter how weak are the gauge interactions w ith generators T,
 T# , etc ., so these gauge bosons and the untrapped fermions do not have
to be real particles to reach the conclusion that the massless spin 1 bound
states reproduce the anomalies of the trapped elementary spin 11 ferrnions of
whi ch they are composed.
   As a simple example, suppose that the underly i ng theory contains n `fla-
vors' of massless fermians, each of whi ch has both left- and right-handed
parts in the defining representation N of an asymptotically free S U( IV)
gauge gro up. We require N to be odd so that there can be untrapped
S U(N)-neutral fermiar i c bound states . Just as in quantum chromodynam-
ics, th i s theory has an automatic global S U L( n ) x S UR(n ) x Uv( 1 ) symmetry,
wi th the left- and right-handed massless fermion s respectively in its (n, 1)
and ( 1, n) representat ions, both having equal values for the U y ( 1 ) quantum
number, wh i ch can be taken as un ity. There are non-vanishing anomaly
constants i n the underlying theory for the S U( rt ) L-,S U( ra)L- U ( 1 )Y and
S U(n ) R-S U(n ) R- U(1 ) Y current triplets, which have the value s
                            D aL,hL ,Q = D uR,hR ,Q = N6 ab ,

where a, b, etc . label the 5U(n) generators Au, normalized so that in the
defining n-component representation tr{A,,Ah} = 16,,h. For n > 2 there
are also non-vanishing anomaly constants for the S U(n ) L-S U(n ) L-S U(n)L
and S U(n)R-S U(n)R-S U(n)R currents, equal t o

                    D aL,bL,cL = D aR,bR,cR = N tr[ { ava, A g l , Ad .

   We suppose here that the SUL(n) x SUR(n) x U(1) symmetry is not
spontaneously broken . Because of trapping, the only fermionic bound
states in the physical spectrum will be contained in representations of this
symmetry that can be formed from mL and MR elementary fermions of
helicity + Z and - ~, respectively, and mL and mR of their antiparticles,
with
                           mL+mR - mL -- mR = kN ,                              (22.5.2)
where k is any positive or negative odd integer . In consequence, the only
irreducible representations (r, s) of S U(n)L x S U R (n) encountered are those
for which r is in the direct product of mL of the defining representations o f


  a theory in which the anomalous currents can be constructed as Lorentz four-vector
  functions of the elementary spin 12 fields, and in order to contribute to the anomaly
  these currents would have to have non-vanishing matrix elements between any massless
  composite particles of spin j = 1, which would ❑ ivtate Lorentz invariance . Massless
  composite particles of spin j > 3/2 are ruled out because in this theory it is also
  possible to construct a conserved energy-momentum tensor, which would have to have
  non-vanishing matrix elements between these massless composite particles, which for
  j Z 3 / 2 would also violate Lorentz invariance.
39 2                                          22 Anomalies

SU(n) and rraL ❑f their complex conjugates, while s is in the direct product
of rrtR of the defining representations of 5U(n) and mR of their complex
conjugates, and the U(1)y quantum number is k117, with k, ML, mR, mL,
and mR subject to Eq . (22. 5 . 2). Let p(r , s, k ) be the number of times an
irreducible representation (r,s) of SUL(n) X SUR(n) with iT( 1 )v quantum
number kN appears among the helicity + 2 bound states . Eq. (22,5 .1 )
then reads
                      p (r, s, k )ds tr(r) [ f .T ,, ,     = N tr[ f Aa , A b I Ael , (2 .5 .3 )
              r,s,k

                          Ar , s, k)dsk tr ( r ) If J_a ,J_ b J1 = tr[{ A a, A b l]      ( 22 . 5 . 4)
                  r,s,k

where tr(r) denotes the trace in the irreducible representation r ❑ f S U (n ) ,
and ds is the dimensionality of representation s of S U(N). The only other
constraint ❑n the p( r , s, k) is that they must be positive integers .
  The complex conjugate (r, s, -k) of any representation (r , s, k) of
SU(2)L x SU(2)R x U( 1 )v has values of the traces tr ('') [{ -Ta , 9 b ig C ]
and k tr(r) [{~ ~, ~b~] opposite to those of the representation (r, s, k), so
Eqs. (2 ..5.3) and (22 .5 .4) only restrict the values o f


Recall that in the notation we have been using here, these traces are
over all massless bound states of helicity + ' , including the antiparticles
of the massless bound states of helicity - ~, which transform according
to the complex conjugate representations . The complex conjugate of any
representation ❑f S U(2 ) L x S U ( 2 ) R X U (1) V has values of tr(r) [{ 37-a, T n Ig-C ]
and ktr(r) [{opposite to those of that representation . Thus we
can sum in (22.5 .3) and (22 .5 .4) only over the representations with U(1 )v
quantum number kN > 0
             E t( r , s, k) ds tr ( r ) [{ 9-a , 9- h~ -Tel = N tr[ { )~a , A b !)J , (22.5 .5)
            r,s,k > Q

                            /'(r, s, k ) dsk tr (r) [ {J a, J b l ] = tr[{ A a> A b J1   (22 .5 .6)
               r ,s,k > 0

with e(r, s, k) equal to the number of times an irreducible representation
( r, s ) of S UL( n) X SUR(n) with U(1 )y quantum number kN > 0 appears
among the helicity + ~ bound states, minus the number of times the same
representation appears among the helicity - ~ bound states . ( If parity is
unbroken then a representation r, s, k must occur among the helicity - Z
bound states as often as the representation s, r, k occurs among the helicity
+ 2 bound states, so in this case t(r, s, k) = - e( s, r, k).)
    First, consider the case of n = 2 flavors . There is no way ❑f coupling
three three-vectors together symmetrically to make an ,S U(2)-invariant,
                           22 .5 Massless Bo und Sta tes                     39 3

so both sides of (22.5 .5) vanish automatically, leaving only the condition
(22.5 .6). The defining two-component representation of SU(2) is contained
in the product of any odd number of these two-component representations,
so we can always find a solution ❑f (22.5.6) with e ( r ,s,k) = 0 for all
SU(2)L x SU(2)R x U(I) V representations with r non-trivial except the
one in which r is the defining representation, s is the trivial representation,
and k = 1, for which we take Z' = 1 . Unfortunately, this solution is far
from unique -there is an infinite number of ways of reproducing the
anomalies of the underlying theory.
   For general n and N it is usual to find many solutions of Eqs. (22.5.5 )
and (22 .5.6), but there are some cases where no solutions can be found .
In such theories we can reach the conclusion that the S U (n ) L x 5 U(n ) R X
U(1 }y symmetry must be partly or completely spontaneously broken. This
has particularly interesting implications for quantum chromodynamics, so
let us now specialize to the case of an SU(3 ) gauge group.
   To be concrete, we will focus on the representations, with k = 1 and
mL = mR = 0 , that can be formed from just three elementary fermions
and no antifermions . These are :

(a) r is the symmetric third-rank 5U(n) tensor ; s is the trivial representa-
      tion.

(b ) r is the antisymmetric third-rank 5U(n) tensor ; s is the trivial repre-
       sentation .

(c) r is the third-rank SU(n) tensor of mixed symmetry ; s is the trivial
      representation .

(d) r is the symmetric second-rank S U(n) tensor ; s is the S U(n) vector .

(e) r is the antisymmetric second-rank S U(n) tensor ; s is the S U(n) vector.
(f) r is the SU(n) vector ; s is the symmetric second-rank SU(n) tensor.

(g) r is the 5 U(n) vector ; s is the antisymmetric second-rank S U(n) tensor.

(h ) r is the trivial representation ; s is the symmetric third-rank 5U(n)
       tensor .
(i) r is the trivial representation ; s is the antisymmetric third-rank SU(n )
       tensor.

{j ) r is the trivial representation ; s is the third-rank S U(n) tensor ❑ f mixed
        symmetry.

fi All SU(N) vectors and tensors here are understood to be contravariant .
394                                         22 Anomalies

For n > 2, Eqs. (22.5 .5) and (22 .5.6) here read ff
            ( n + 3) fin + 6Y u + ~ ( n - 3)(n - 6)eb + (n 2 - g }~C + n(n + 4)ed
         +n(n - 4)e, + ~ n2( n + 1 )ef + ~ n2(n - 1 )fig = 3                                    (22 .5.7)
and

            ( n + 2) fin + 3)e a + ~ ( n - z ) (n - 3) ~h + (n2 - 3)Z'c + n ( n + 2)Z d
         + n ( n - 2 )/'e + ~ non + 1 ) ~ f + ~ non - 1 ) fig = 1 .                             (22.5 .8 )
 There is no problem in satisfying Eq. (22 .5 .7), but note that if n is a
 multiple of three then for all values of the es, each term on the left-
 hand side of Eq . (22.5 .8) is also a multiple of three, which makes it
 impossible to satisfy this condition . We conclude in particular that the
 S U(3)L X S U(3 ) R X U G }y symmetry of quantum chromodynamics with three
flavors of massless quarks must b e spontaneously broken. This result is not
 limited to the representations (a)-(j), but applies to any representations
 of SU(3)L x SU(3)R X U(1} V that can be formed from color-neutral
 combinations of quarks and antiquarks .


   Aside from special cases such as an S U(3) gauge group with n = 3
elementary fermion SU(3)-triplets, the 't Hooft anomaly matching condi-
tion is not very restrictive ; in general it allows a wide variety of massless
bound states when chiral symmetry is unbroken . 't Hooft also proposed
a decoupling condition, which requires that when one or more of the ele-
mentary fermion flavors become very heavy there should be no unbroken
chiral symmetries that prevent composite particles that contain heavy el-
ementary fermions from acquiring masses . For instance, in the case ❑f an
S U(3) color gauge group, if we give one of the n quark types a large mass
then those three-fermion bound states that contain a single massive quark
will furnish representations (r', s') of the group S Urn - 1) x S U(n -1) that
are either

(v) r' is the symmetric second rank SU(n - 1) tensor ; s' is the trivial
      representation ,

(w) r' is the antisymmetric second rank S U (n - 1) tensor ; s' is the trivial
     representation ,

(x) r ' and s' are S U(n) vectors,

It i n R e f 1 6, 't Hooft assumed t hat p arity is no t spontaneous l y b r o ke n , so he gave t h ese
   formula s fo r th e cas e w here ea = -eh , ea = - fir, t, = - ej, ea - - If, and e e - -fig .
   As we see h ere, t he m ain c oncl u sion d oe s n ot depend on p a rity conservat io n.
                           22.5 Massless B ound States                               395

(y) r' is the trivial representat i on, s ' i s the symmetric second rank SU(n-1 )
      tensor,

(z) r' is the trivial representation, s' is the antisymmetric second rank
      S U(n - 1) tensor.

In order for the three-fermion mass state to acquire a large mass, it is
necessary that P( r', s') = 0, where Z '(r', s') is the number of times that
an irreducible representation fir', s'} occurs among the helicity + ~ bound
states minus the number of times the same representation appears among
the helicity - 2 bound states . By inspecting the list of three-fermion
representations (a)-O} of 5U(n) x 5 U (n) to see what representations of
.5 Urn - 1) x 5 U(n - 1) they yield, we see then that the 't Hooft decoupling
condition requires that
                           0 _ e'v = (a+ ec+ ed

                           0 _ e w = 6 + ec + fe
                           0_tx       tf + t g + t d + t e                      (22.5 .9)




Unfortunately, in most cases there are still an infinite number of solutions,
though there are no solutions in which the es are n-independent integers .
   The decoupling condition seems quite plausible, but its use by 't Hooft
was questioned 17 on the ground that, as one or more fermion masses
increase, one usually encounters phase transitions that make the mass
spectrum different from what it would be for small fermion masses . There
is a stronger condition, known as the persistent mass condition, which
requires that when one or more ❑ f the elementary fermion flavors acquire
any mass, there should be no unbroken chiral symmetries that prevent
composite particles that contain these massive elementary fermions from
acquiring some masses ." If valid, the persistent mass condition would
lead to the same consequences, such as Eqs . (22.5.9), that were described
by 't Hooft, with no chance of being invalidated by phase transitions .
   It is easy to construct non-realistic models in which the persistent
mass condition is violated, such as theories with spontaneously broken
non-chiral symmetries, which lead to massless Goldstone bosons formed
as composites of massive fermions ." (These models also exhibit phase
transitions with increasing fermion masses, which invalidate 't Hooft's
conclusions from the decoupling condition .) But the work of Vafa an d


t In the parity conserving case studied by 't Hooft, the fourth and fifth equations are
  identical to the first and second, while the third is empty .
396                                22 Anomalie s

Witten discussed in Section 19 .9 shows that, in a variety of more realistic
QCD-like theories, non-chiral symmetries cannot be spontaneously bro-
ken, so this should not be taken as a serious objection to the persistent
mass condition .



                       22.6 Consistency Condition s

The numerical coefficient appearing in the anomaly for any symmetry
depends on the matter content of the theory . On the other hand, the form
❑ f the anomaly is largely independent of the details of the theory, because
it is governed by consistency conditions, first presented in 1971 by Wess
and Zumino.1 8
   Even when we are interested in anomalies in global symmetry currents,
in order to derive the consistency conditions it is convenient to imagine
that all symmetry currents are coupled to gauge fields, which for non-
Abelian symmetries also couple to each other, in such a way that these
symmetries become local symmetries of the Lagrangian density . We can
always return to the case of global symmetry by letting the corresponding
gauge coupling constants become infinitesimal . Apart from anomalies,
the effective action I'[A ] in a background gauge field Aa,,(x) will in
this formalism be invariant under infinitesimal transformations Apu (y ) -*
A#,, (y) + i f d4X fa(x) T,(x) A&(y) on the gauge field, where in order to
reproduce the transformation (15.1.9) we must tak e
                            a                                         6
            iJI-'(x) = -      . ~ - G~ fl vAfl~(x )                                         (22.6.1)
                           Ox
                             u Taking anomalies into ac ount, 'Y- a ( x) no longer annihilates F[A], but
rather
                             T a (x)T[A] = Ga [x ; Al ,                                     (22.6.2)
where G. [x ; A] represents the effect of the anomaly . Eq. (22.6.2) may also
be written as a formula for the covariant divergence of the expectation
value ❑f the current :
                            Du (.Ta (x)) = -iGx [x ; A] ,                 (22.6.3 )
where

                                            6    a,( X )

and Du is the gauge-covar i ant derivative (1 5 . 1 . 10), taken here in the adjoint
representati on w i th (tp)ya = -iCxfly.
                               22 .6 Consistency Conditions 39 7

  The Wess-Zumino consistency conditions follow from the commutation
relations
                       [J a(x)' g-fl( )] = iC ,,fl 6 4(x - y )~7- y ( x ) .           (22.6.5)
                                     Y            Y
From Eqs. (22 .6.2) and (22.6.3), we derive the general consistency condition
      ~y-a(x)G# [y ; A] - -17-#( x )G a [y ; A] = aCa# Y 6 4 ( x - y )G,~ [y ; A] .   (22 .6.6)
  These cons istency condi tions were origi nally derived by Wens and Zu-
mino for the chiral ,5 U(3 ) x 5U(3) symmetry of the strong interact i ons,
a special case of phys ical as well as historical importance. Here the
generators J a(x) act ing on the gauge fields consist of the even parity
generators ~~(,,(x) defined by Eq . (22 . 3 . 31 ), and the odd parity generators
Xa (x) defined by ( 22.3.32 ).M* They satisfy the commutation relations
                                                  6 (
                         ['N a ( x ) a Ub(y) 1 = i 4 X - y)fabcVc(x) ,

                                              6 (
                         PWA x~, -T b(y )1 = i 4 x - y )fabc y,( x


                            a( x ), -T h( y )l = z64(X - y)fabcWc(x )V

where }'~b, are the S U(3) structure constants . Si nce the S U(3) subgroup
generated by the ~J a i s not spontaneously broken , i t i s conven ient to
treat the integration over fermion momenta in such a way as to preserve
i nva ri ance under gauge transformations generated by N,, , so that


leaving us with the non-zero anomal y


The non-trivial consistency conditions are the n
                                               6
                           'y a ( X ) Gh ( y ) = i 4 ( X - Wahc Gc ( X )
and


The first of these simply says that G,,(x) transforms like an octet under
ordinary S U(3) transformations. The second condition imposes ❑ther
strong constraints on Gu(x ) . The reader may check that this condition i s

 The factor -i was inserted in Eq . (22 .b.1 ) in order to provide the conventional factor +i
 accompanying the structure constant Cx fly. in this commutation relation . A reminder :
 we are using a basis for the Lie algebra in which the structure constants are totally
 antisymmetric, and so we do not distinguish between upper and lower gauge indices .
 Another reminder : as mentioned in Section 22 .3, the and ON',, used here are what
 were called Y,, and XA in Ref 8.
