                                            MAMA/307, NST3AS/307, MAAS/307

MAT3
MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                           Part III

Friday 13 June 2025   9:00 am to 11:00 am



                             PAPER 307


                       SUPERSYMMETRY

Before you begin please read these instructions carefully
   Candidates have TWO HOURS to complete the written examination.

                 Attempt no more than TWO questions.
                  There are THREE questions in total.
                    The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                      SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                  None
Treasury tag
Script paper
Rough paper


              You may not start to read the questions
               printed on the subsequent pages until
               instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                                2

1      This question concerns renormalisable N = 1 globally supersymmetric SU (3) gauge
theory with a single chiral superfield Φ in the fundamental representation of SU (3) and
with a vector superfield V = Va Ta where Ta are generators of SU (3) in the fundamental
representation. Strictly speaking, this theory possesses a gauge anomaly, but we shall
ignore it here. The supersymmetry generators Qα , Qα̇ have representations Qα , Qα̇ when
acting on a function on superspace and we shall denote SUSY covariant derivatives by Dα ,
Dα̇ .

 (i) Under a SUSY transformation, a general superfield S transforms as

                         S(xµ , θα , θ̄α̇ ) → exp[i(ϵQ + ϵ̄Q)]S(xµ , θα , θ̄α̇ ),

     where ϵα and ϵ̄α̇ are Grassman-valued SUSY transformation parameters. From this,
     find the explicit forms of Qα , Qα̇ as differential operators. You may assume any
     properties of the super-Poincaré algebra from lectures, provided that they are clearly
     stated.

 (ii) What is the defining property of a vector superfield Va ?

(iii) What is the defining property of a chiral superfield Φ?

(iv) A generalised SU (3) gauge transformation is given by Φ → exp(−2iΛ)Φ, where
     Λ = Λa Ta . Give the mass dimension of the superfields Λa and state clearly any
     restrictions on on their nature.

The SUSY SU (3) field-strength chiral superfield is
                                1 2
                          Wα = − D (exp(−2V )Dα exp(2V )) .
                                8

 (v) Write down the theory’s Lagrangian density in terms of superspace integrals involving
     functions of Va , Φ and Wα .

(vi) Assuming generalised SU (3) gauge invariance of the standard Kähler potential, relate
     V and V ′ where V → V ′ = Va′ Ta under a finite generalised gauge transformation.

(vii) Using the relation you derived in (vi), show that the entire Lagrangian density is
      invariant under a generalised gauge transformation.




                                                                               Part III, Paper 307
                                            3

2      Describe why theoretical arguments lead us to expect that the order of magnitude
of sparticle masses is a few TeV or less. Your answer should include Feynman diagrams
and order of magnitude estimates.
      Define R−parity in terms of spin s, baryon number B and lepton number L.
       Write down the R−parity violating superpotential of the MSSM WRP V [you may
leave gauge indices suppressed].
       Draw a Feynman diagram to illustrate that two of the baryon/lepton number
violating terms in WRP V can induce proton decay into a pion and an invisible particle. Is
the invisible particle a neutrino or an anti-neutrino? Which family can it be from? What
is the electric charge of the pion?
      By dimensional arguments, estimate the rough order of magnitude of the decay
rate of the proton via this channel in terms of the Yukawa coupling constants in WRP V
assuming that SUSY particle masses are 10 TeV.
      The experimental lower bound on the proton lifetime through this channel is
approximately
                              τp→µ+ π0 > 1034 years.
Use this and dimensional arguments to determine an order of magnitude upper bound on
the product of the two Yukawa couplings that give rise to proton decay above.
      Show that R-parity forbids all of the terms in WRP V . Now impose R−parity on the
theory.
       In the MSSM Lagrangian, there are direct couplings between a (non-gauge) particle,
its anti-particle, an SU (2)L W −boson and a gluon. Which part of the Lagrangian density
does this term come from? Draw a Feynman diagram for it and write its Feynman rule.
     [ In natural units, 1 second is of order 1024 GeV−1 and the mass of a proton is 1
GeV. ]




Part III, Paper 307                                                    [TURN OVER]
                                                    4

3        The generators of the Poincaré group M µν and P σ satisfy

                                 [M µν , P σ ] = i(P µ η νσ − P ν η µσ ).

        Define the Pauli-Lubjanski operator Wµ in terms of M µν and P µ .
      Write down a general Poincaré transformation on a left-handed spinor field ψα (x)
in terms of the left-handed spinor representation of the Lorentz group algebra
                                              i µ ν
                                     σ µν =     (σ σ̄ − σ ν σ̄ µ ) ,
                                              4
which satisfies
                                                  1 µνρσ
                                         σ µν =      ϵ   σρσ .
                                                  2i
         In terms of (SU (2)L , SU (2)R ) representation spaces of the Lorentz algebra, ψ ∼
( 2 , 0). Write down ( 21 , 0) ⊗ ( 12 , 0) in terms of irreducible (SU (2)L , SU (2)R ) representation
  1

spaces. Show this explicitly by the decomposition of ψα χβ , where χ ∼ ( 21 , 0).
      Write down all of the commutators or anti-commutators of the super-Poincaré
algebra which involve the supersymmetry generators Qα and/or Q̄α̇ .

    (i) Defining Bµ = Wµ − 14 (Q̄σ̄µ Q), calculate [Bµ , Pρ ].

 (ii) Defining Cµν = Bµ Pν − Bν Pµ , calculate [Cµν , Pρ ].

(iii) Compute [Q̄σ̄µ Q, Qα ].

(iv) Compute [Bµ , Qα ].

 (v) Compute [Cµν , Qα ].

(vi) Defining the Lorentz scalar superspin operator

                                               C̃2 = Cµν C µν ,

       write down the implied commutator with M µν . Thus, demonstrate that C̃2 is a
       Casimir of the super-Poincaré algebra.



                                     END OF PAPER




                                                                              Part III, Paper 307
