                                          MAMA/307, NST3AS/307, MAAS/307

MAT3
MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                         Part III

Friday 31 May 2024   1:30 pm to 3:30 pm



                            PAPER 307


                      SUPERSYMMETRY

Before you begin please read these instructions carefully
   Candidates have TWO HOURS to complete the written examination.

                Attempt no more than TWO questions.
                 There are THREE questions in total.
                   The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                    SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                None
Treasury tag
Script paper
Rough paper


           You may not start to read the questions
            printed on the subsequent pages until
            instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                                    2

1      The generators of the Poincaré algebra are the hermitian operators M µν and P σ
with algebra
             h          i
                µ     ν
               P , P      = 0,
           h            i                        
             M µν , P σ = i P µ η νσ − P ν η µσ ,
         h              i                                                   
          M µν , M ρσ = i M µσ η νρ + M νρ η µσ − M µρ η νσ − M νσ η µρ .

A spinor representation of the Lorentz algebra is provided by
                                              i
                                  (σ µν )βα := (σ µ σ̄ ν − σ ν σ̄ µ )βα ,
                                              4
where σαµα̇ = (I, σ 1 , σ 2 , σ 3 )αα̇ , i.e. the 2 by 2 identity matrix followed by the three Pauli
matrices, and (σ̄ µ )α̇α = (I, −σ 1 , −σ 2 , −σ 3 )α̇α .

(a) In one sentence, describe what the Coleman-Mandula theorem says about extensions
    of the Poincaré algebra in quantum field theory. Briefly discuss the assumption that
    can be weakened to allow supersymmetry, including a short description of the type of
    algebra that results.

(b) What does the Coleman-Mandula theorem imply for the algebra between an internal
    symmetry generator Ta and a supersymmetry generator Qα ? Ignoring R−symmetries,
    extend the Poincaré algebra with the N = 1 generators Qα , Q̄α̇ , giving detailed
    arguments for the chosen form of each relation.

(c) Consider the action under a parity reversal operator P̂ , where |ηP | = 1 and

                P̂ Qα P̂ −1 = ηP (σ 0 )αβ̇ Q̄β̇ ,        P̂ Q̄α̇ P̂ −1 = −ηP∗ (σ̄ 0 )α̇β Qβ .
    By performing a parity transformation on each side of the algebra between Qα and
    Q̄β̇ that you derived in part (b), check that the relation is consistent with a parity
    transformation.

(d) Define the fermion number operator (−)F by its action on bosonic states |B⟩ and
    fermionic states |F ⟩. Prove that the number of fermionic states nF is equal to the
    number of bosonic states nB in any supermultiplet. Where does your argument break
    down for theories that incorporate additional supersymmetry breaking terms in the
    Lagrangian?




                                                                                 Part III, Paper 307
                                                  3

2

(a) Define what it means for a superfield Φ(x, θ, θ̄) to be chiral. Give an example of a
    chiral superfield in the MSSM and list the physical component fields contained within
    it.
    Show that, when written in terms of y µ := xµ + iθσ µ θ̄, a chiral superfield has a
    particularly simple expansion in terms of component fields. Hence deduce that
                                      √
                Φ(x, θ, θ̄) = ϕ(x) + 2θψ(x) + (θθ)F (x) + Aθσ µ θ̄∂µ ϕ(x) +
                                   B(θθ)∂µ ψ(x)σ µ θ̄ + C(θθ)(θ̄θ̄)∂µ ∂ µ ϕ(x),

    where A, B and C are constants which you should determine.

(b) Consider a globally N = 1 supersymmetric theory with only three chiral superfields
    X2+ , X0 , X2− where the suffix labels the charge of the superfield under a gauged
    U (1) symmetry of the theory. Do you expect the theory to possess a gauge anomaly?
    Explain your answer including Feynman diagrams and a mathematical expression.
    Write down the most general superpotential of the model.
    Now set any parameters multiplying quadratic or linear superpotential terms to zero.
    State in one sentence why we expect quantum corrections to respect these conditions.
    Write down the scalar potential of the model including any Fayet-Iliopoulos terms,
    and by analysing it, determine whether and how the model spontaneously breaks
    supersymmetry, or U (1) symmetry, or both.

[ You should use the conventions followed by the course, e.g. ϵ12 = −ϵ12 = ϵ1̇2̇ = −ϵ1̇2̇ = 1
and η µν is the ‘mostly minus’ metric. You may find the following super-covariant derivative
useful: D̄α̇ := −∂¯α̇ − iθβ (σ µ )β α̇ ∂µ along with {σ µ , σ̄ ν } = 2η µν I2 , where I2 is the 2 by 2
identity matrix, and (σ̄ µ )α̇α := ϵαβ ϵα̇β̇ (σ µ )β β̇ . ]




Part III, Paper 307                                                               [TURN OVER]
                                             4

3      Describe supersymmetric gauge unification. You should include graphs depicting
the evolution of gauge couplings for both the MSSM and the Standard Model and Feynman
diagrams for a contribution to the evolution of g2 from a superpartner and one from its
Standard Model counterpart, but you need not do any explicit computation.
       The one-loop evolution of each MSSM gauge coupling ga (µ) with renormalisation
scale µ is given by
                           dga (µ)
                         µ         = βa ga3 (µ) (no sum on a),
                             dµ
where βa are real numerical constants. Solve the equation, finding ga (µ) in terms of input
data ga (µ0 ).
      g1 (MZ ) and g2 (MZ ) are determined very accurately by experiments and can be
used, assuming MSSM gauge unification, to provide a prediction of g3 (MZ ). Determine
the gauge unification scale MGU T in terms of MZ , g2 (MZ ) and g1 (MZ ).
      Then derive the gauge unification prediction

                    g3−2 (MZ ) = g2−2 (MZ ) + A[g2−2 (MZ ) − g1−2 (MZ )],

where A is a numerical constant which you should evaluate in terms of the βa , which you
may assume all take different values. Do you expect this relation to be approximately
satisfied by current measurements? Give your reasoning.



                                 END OF PAPER




                                                                            Part III, Paper 307
