MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                            Part III

Monday, 3 June, 2013     1:30 pm to 3:30 pm



                                PAPER 43


                         SUPERSYMMETRY


                Attempt no more than TWO questions.
                 There are THREE questions in total.
                       The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                          SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                      None
Treasury Tag
Script paper



              You may not start to read the questions
               printed on the subsequent pages until
               instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                                    2

1
      Answer both parts (a) and (b), which are unrelated.
(a) The algebra of the Lorentz group SO(1, 3) can be written in terms of generators Mµν
as        h            i                                                    
            Mµν , Mρσ = i Mµσ ηνρ + Mνρ ηµσ − Mµρ ηνσ − Mνσ ηµρ .

Rotations Ji and Lorentz boosts Ki are defined by
                                     1
                              Ji =     ǫijk Mjk ,         Ki = M0i .
                                     2
Show that the Lorentz algebra can be re-expressed in the form

          [Ki , Kj ] = iǫijk (A1 Jk + B1 Kk ),          [Ji , Kj ] = iǫijk (A2 Jk + B2 Kk ),

                               [Ji , Jj ] = iǫijk (A3 Jk + B3 Kk ),
where A1 , A2 , A3 and B1 , B2 , B3 are integers, which you should determine.
(b) Discuss the hierarchy problem, the technical hierarchy problem and its supersymmetric
solution. Include a discussion of vector boson, chiral fermion and squark/slepton masses
as regards the hierarchy problem.




                                                                                 Part III, Paper 43
                                            3

2
    Write down the right hand side of the anti-commutator between the N = 1 global
SUSY generators Qα and Q̄β̇
                                   
                                     Qα , Q̄β̇ .
                                                                 n            o
      Next, using the fermion number operator (−)F , calculate       (−)F , Qα .
      Hence prove that the number of bosons is identical to the number of fermions in a
supersymmetric multiplet.
      Considering now a supersymmetric theory that has supersymmetry breaking terms
added to its Lagrangian, where does this argument fail?
           
      Use Qα , Q̄β̇ to derive conditions on the energy of the vacuum state |vaci for the
cases of
(a) N = 1 global SUSY
(b) broken global SUSY.


      Considering three chiral superfields Φ+ , Φ0 , Φ− with gauged U (1) charges +1, 0
and -1, respectively and superpotential W = λΦ+ Φ0 Φ− , write down the resulting scalar
potential in terms of the scalar components ϕ+ , ϕ0 , ϕ− .
      By minimising this potential determine whether (and how) the model spontaneously
breaks:
(c) U(1)
(d) SUSY




Part III, Paper 43                                                        [TURN OVER
                                                  4

3
       Define what is meant by a chiral superfield Φ in terms of the superspace covariant
deriative D̄α̇ = −∂¯α̇ − iθ β (σ µ )β α̇ ∂µ . Derive the form of Φ in terms of component fields
using the variables y µ , θ α , θ̄ α̇, where y µ ≡ xµ +iθσ µ θ̄. Show that polynomials of Φ are also
chiral superfields. Write down the Lagrangian in terms of a Kähler potential K(Φ† , Φ)
and the superpotential W (Φ).

       Specialising to the Wess-Zumino model containing one single chiral superfield Φ,
the tree-level superpotential is
                                           1     1
                                    Wtree = mΦ2 + gΦ3 .
                                           2     3
Calculate the tree-level effective potential for the scalar component fields. Give the
Feynman diagram and Feynman rule corresponding to the quartic scalar coupling.
       Define two U (1) symmetries of Wtree , where m and g are considered to be spurions.
One of the U (1)s should be an R−symmetry with m being chargeless under it. Use this to
derive the most general form of a loop-corrected effective superpotential F (Φ, m, g). Are
Wtree , m or g renormalised? Give reasons for your answer.




                                    END OF PAPER




                                                                              Part III, Paper 43
