                                Problems                              175

On thisbasis,they suggested that the theory with a weak gauge coupling
e is fullyequivalent to one with a strong gauge coupling An/e. Neither
the purely bosonic theory nor the simplest versions of the N = 1 and
N = 2 extended supersymmetry theories reallyhave this property;20 for
one thing, the massive charged elementary vector bosons of the broken
gauge symmetries have spin 1,while allof the monopoles and dyons have
spins 1/2 or 0. (We willsee in Section 29.5 that N = 2 theoriesdo have a
dualityproperty of a more subtle sort.)But for N = 4 supersymmetry the
monopole statesform multipletswith one particleof spin 1, four particles
of spin 1/2, and two particlesof spin 0,just likethe elementary particles.20
Evidence has accumulated21 that N = 4 supersymmetric gauge theoriesare
indeed invariantunder the interchange of electricand magnetic quantum
numbers and of e with An/e. The equivalence of theorieswith large and
small coupling constants has become an increasinglyimportant theme in
stringtheory, but thisis beyond the scope of thisbook.


                               Problems

  1. To second order in gauge coupling constants, calculatethe
          of the superfieldsQA that are needed to put the gauge superfield
     components
     VA in Wess-Zumino gauge by the transformation (27.1.12).

  2. Show that the most general chiralspinor superfieldWa satisfyingthe
     condition (27.2.20)has components f^ satisfyingthe homogeneous
     Maxwell equations ^vpGdpf^ = 0. What conditions on the other
     components of Wa are imposed by Eq. (27.2.20)?

  3. Consider a general renormalizable N = 1 supersymmetric gauge
     theory with an 51/(2) gauge group and a single chiral superfield
     belonging to the 3-vector representation of 51/(2).What isthe most
     general superpotential for this theory? Construct the Lagrangian
     density of the whole theory explicitly.Eliminate the auxiliaryfields.
     Show that supersymmetry isnot broken in thistheory. What are the
     masses of the particlesof this theory?

  4. Express the gaugino and chiralfermion fieldsin the supersymmetric
     version of quantum electrodynamics described in Section 27.5 in
     terms of the goldstino fieldand other spinor fieldsof definitemass.

  5. Consider the renormalizable N = 2 supersymmetric theory with an
     51/(3) gauge symmetry and no hypermultiplets.What are the values
     of the scalar fieldsfor which the potential vanishes? What are the
     massless gauge fieldsfor non-zero values of these scalars?Calculate
