27.9 Gauge Theories with Extended Supersymmetry 161

fortunately we can get by with the tools already at hand. Any theory with
N = 2 supersymmetry also has N = 1 supersymmetry, so its Lagrangian
must be a special case of the Lagrangians already considered in this
chapter. To construct a Lagrangian with N = 2 supersymmetry for some
set of the N = 2 supermultiplets of particles constructed in Sections 25.4
and 25.5, we need only write down the most general Lagrangian with
N = 1 supersymmetry whose N = 1 supermultiplets contain physical
fields for the particles in the N = 2 supermultiplets, and then impose a
discrete R-symmetry on the Lagrangian: a symmetry that acts differently
on different components of N = 2 supermultiplets. The Lagrangian
density will then be invariant under a second supersymmetry, whose
supermultiplets are given by acting on the supermultiplets of ordinary
N = 1 supersymmetry with the R-symmetry.
It will be convenient to choose the discrete R-transformation so that

0:->Q2, Q2 > —-Q1. (27.9.1)

If the central charge were zero then the supersymmetry algebra would be
invariant under an SU(2) R-symmetry group, which has the transforma-
tion (27.9.1) as one finite element exp(izt2/2), but symmetry under the
discrete symmetry is sufficient for our purposes, so we do not need to
assume a Zero central charge. In fact, it will turn out that the Lagrangians
we construct by this method will have an SU(2) R-symmetry, not just
symmetry under the discrete transformation (27.9.1).

Let us first consider the renormalizable theory of the gauge bosons
of a general gauge group, together with the superpartners required by
N = 2 extended supersymmetry. We saw in Section 25.4 that in N = 2
global supersymmetry theories a massless gauge boson can only belong
to a multiplet also containing a pair of massless fermions of each helicity
+1/2 that transform as a doublet under the SU(2) R-symmetry and a pair
of SU(2)-singlet spinless bosons. Since N = 2 supersymmetry includes
N = 1 supersymmetry, the renormalizable Lagrangian for this theory
must be a special case of the general renormalizable Lagrangian density
(27.4.1). One feature of this special case is that since the gauge boson
belongs to the adjoint representation of the gauge group, so must also the
fermions and scalar field. To furnish N = 2 supermultiplets of fields with
the correct particle content, we must have one N = 1 chiral superfield ®,
with component fields @4, ys, Fa (with p4 Majorana and ¢@, and F4
both complex) for each N = 1 gauge multiplet V4, 14, D4. We impose a
discrete R-symmetry under the transformation

(with all other fields invariant) because this is the effect of the transforma-
tion (27.9.1). Since a non-trivial superpotential would give py, interactions
