Problems 175

On this basis, they suggested that the theory with a weak gauge coupling
e is fully equivalent to one with a strong gauge coupling 4z/e. Neither
the purely bosonic theory nor the simplest versions of the N = 1 and
N = 2 extended supersymmetry theories really have this property;?° for
one thing, the massive charged elementary vector bosons of the broken
gauge symmetries have spin 1, while all of the monopoles and dyons have
spins 1/2 or 0. (We will see in Section 29.5 that N = 2 theories do have a
duality property of a more subtle sort.) But for N = 4 supersymmetry the
monopole states form multiplets with one particle of spin 1, four particles
of spin 1/2, and two particles of spin 0, just like the elementary particles.”°
Evidence has accumulated?! that N = 4 supersymmetric gauge theories are
indeed invariant under the interchange of electric and magnetic quantum
numbers and of e with 42/e. The equivalence of theories with large and
small coupling constants has become an increasingly important theme in
string theory, but this is beyond the scope of this book.

Problems

1. To second order in gauge coupling constants, calculate the compo-
nents of the superfields 04 that are needed to put the gauge superfield
V4 in Wess—Zumino gauge by the transformation (27.1.12).

2. Show that the most general chiral spinor superfield W, satisfying the
condition (27.2.20) has components f,,, satisfying the homogeneous
Maxwell equations e“”?°0,f,, = 0. What conditions on the other
components of W, are imposed by Eq. (27.2.20)?

3. Consider a general renormalizable N = 1 supersymmetric gauge
theory with an SU(2) gauge group and a single chiral superfield
belonging to the 3-vector representation of SU(2). What is the most
general superpotential for this theory? Construct the Lagrangian
density of the whole theory explicitly. Eliminate the auxiliary fields.
Show that supersymmetry is not broken in this theory. What are the
masses of the particles of this theory?

4. Express the gaugino and chiral fermion fields in the supersymmetric
version of quantum electrodynamics described in Section 27.5 in
terms of the goldstino field and other spinor fields of definite mass.

5. Consider the renormalizable N = 2 supersymmetric theory with an
SU(3) gauge symmetry and no hypermultiplets. What are the values
of the scalar fields for which the potential vanishes? What are the
massless gauge fields for non-zero values of these scalars? Calculate
