                  MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
                             Physics Department

Physics 8.962: General Relativity                                              March 23, 2018
Prof. Alan Guth

                                 PROBLEM SET 7
DUE DATE: Thursday, April 5, 2018, at 5:00 pm.
TOPICS COVERED AND RELEVANT LECTURES: This problem set focuses on
  two properties of curvature. Problem 1 concerns the relation between curvature and the
  parallel transport of a vector around an infinitesimal loop, discussed in Carroll’s Sec. 3.6.
  The second two concern the geodesic deviation equation, which is discussed in Carroll’s
  Sec. 3.10. Both of these topics will also be discussed in lecture on April 2, which will
  include a discussion of Eq. (2.4) below, which is not in Carroll’s book.
MAXIMUM GRADE: This problem set has a total of 65 points.

PROBLEM 1: PARALLEL TRANSPORT AROUND AN INFINITESIMAL
  LOOP (15 pts)
    Following Carroll’s description on p. 121, we can imagine parallel transporting a vector V µ
around an infinitesimal loop, specified by two infinitesimal vectors. We will depart slightly
from Carroll’s notation by calling these two vectors Aµ and B ν (rather than Aµ and B ν ),
where  is infinitesimal, and Aµ and B µ are finite. We then imagine parallel transporting
V µ by first moving it along the vector Aµ , then along B ν , then backward along Aµ and
backward along B ν , to return to the starting point, as shown in the figure below (adapted
from Fig. 3.5 of Carroll):




Show that to second order in , the change in V µ is given by

                                  δV ρ = −2 Rρ σµν V σ Aµ B ν ,                           (1.1)

where Rρ σµν is the Riemann curvature tensor, defined by the statement that

                                    [∇µ , ∇ν ]V ρ = Rρ σµν V σ ,                           (1.2)


                                                 1
8.962 General Relativity: Problem Set 7, Spring 2018                                        p. 2


for any vector field V ρ , or equivalently as

                         Rρ σµν = ∂µ Γρνσ − ∂ν Γρµσ + Γρµλ Γλνσ − Γρνλ Γλµσ .              (1.3)

Note that the sign shown in Eq. (1.1) is the opposite of the sign in Carroll’s book, but I
think the sign shown here is correct. Recall that a vector V µ (λ) defined on a curve xµ (λ) is
said to be parallel transported along the curve if
                                     DV µ   dxν
                                          ≡     ∇ν V µ = 0 ,                               (1.4)
                                      dλ    dλ
which can be written more explicitly as

                     dxν ∂V µ               dV µ dxν µ σ
                                         
                                    µ   σ
                               + Γνσ V =        +   Γ V =0.                                (1.5)
                      dλ ∂xν                 dλ   dλ νσ


PROBLEM 2: GEODESIC DEVIATION ON A TWO-SPHERE (25 pts)
    In Problem 3 of Problem Set 6, you calculated the metric, connection, Riemann curvature
tensor, Ricci tensor, and Ricci scalar on a two-sphere of radius A. In this problem we will
consider a family of geodesics on the two-sphere of radius A, using them as an example to
explore the meaning of the geodesic deviation equation. We will use the usual polar angles
θ (angle from north pole) and φ (azimuthal angle) as coordinates.
    Consider the family of geodesics xµ (φ0 , t) that start on the equator at longitude (az-
imuthal angle) φ0 , with an initial tangent vector dxµ /dt pointing north. Take t to be the
distance along the geodesics, starting with t = 0 on the equator.

 (a) (5 pts) Consider in particular two trajecties in the family described above, one starting
     at φ0 = 0 and the other at φ0 = ∆φ. Calculate the geodesic separation h (i.e., the
     great circle distance) between the two trajectories as a function of t. Calculate this first
     exactly, and then imagine that ∆φ is very small, giving a small angle approximation for
     h(t) that is accurate to first order in ∆φ. Calculate the acceleration of the separation,
     d2 h/dt2 , using this small angle approximation.

 (b) (8 pts) Using the notation of Carroll, Section 3.10, which we also used in lecture,
     consider the geodesic deviation equation,

                              µ D2 µ
                             A ≡ 2 S ≡ ∇T (∇T S µ ) = Rµ νρσ T ν T ρ S σ ,                 (2.1)
                                dt
      where
                                           ∂xµ                    ∂xµ
                                    Tµ ≡           and     Sµ ≡       ,                    (2.2)
                                            ∂t                    ∂s
8.962 General Relativity: Problem Set 7, Spring 2018                                      p. 3


     where s parameterizes a family of geodesics xµ (s, t) ∈ M , so for each s, xµ (s, t) is a
     geodesic with affine parameter t, and

                               ∇T ≡ T ρ ∇ρ      and    ∇S ≡ S ρ ∇ρ .                     (2.3)

     For the family of geodesics described in the preamble, taking s = φ, calculate the two
     components of the right-hand side of Eq. (2.1).

 (c) (7 pts) The left-hand side of the geodesic equation, Aµ ≡ ∇T (∇T S µ ) is also rather
     complicated, since each ∇ involves both derivative and connection terms. Expand the
     left-hand side, deriving expressions for Aθ and Aφ in terms of ordinary derivatives of
     S µ with respect to t, plus other terms. Is the behavior that you found in part (a)
     consistent with the geodesic deviation equation?

 (d) (5 pts) Aµ is referred to as the “relative acceleration of geodesics,” but Carroll warns
     us that we should take this name with a grain of salt. Carroll doesn’t explain the
     need for the salt, but the calculations in part (c) should give you an example of the
     complications: the calculation of Aµ involves derivatives of connections, which give
     nontrivial corrections which need not vanish even in a locally inertial frame. In lecture
     we developed a related equation which directly determines the 2nd derivative of the
     metric distance between infinitesimally separated geodesics:
                                                    "                      2 #
                   d2 `
                                                                  
                          1                       1     DS   DS        DS
                        = Rµνρσ S µ T ν T ρ S σ + 3 S 2    ·    − S·            ,        (2.4)
                   dt2    `                      `      dt dt           dt
                p
     where ` ≡ gµν S µ S ν , and for any two vectors, A · B ≡ Aµ Bµ . Show that the second
     term on the right-hand side of Eq. (2.4) vanishes (either by direct calculation or by
     a more general argument), and evaluate the first term, as applied to the family of
     geodesics described in the preamble. Is the behavior you found in part (a) consistent
     with Eq. (2.4)?


PROBLEM 3: GEODESIC DEVIATION IN THE HYPERBOLIC PLANE (25
  pts)
   In Problem 4 of Problem Set 6, you calculated the connection, Riemann curvature tensor,
Ricci tensor, and Ricci scalar for a space of constant negative curvature, described by the
metric
                                        a
                                 ds2 = 2 (dx2 + dy 2 + dz 2 ) ,                       (3.1)
                                        z
where {(x, y, z), x ∈ R, y ∈ R, z > 0}. In Problem 4 of Problem Set 2, you showed that
geodsics in this space are semicircles centered around any point with z = 0. Here we will
consider a one-parameter family of such geodesics, defined by initial conditions

                                   xµ (s, 0) = (0, 0, Z + s)                             (3.2)
8.962 General Relativity: Problem Set 7, Spring 2018                                          p. 4


and
                                    ∂xµ
                                        (s, t)     = (1, 0, 0) .                             (3.3)
                                     ∂t        t=0


 (a) (8 pts) Using the same definitions as in Problem 1, calculate the right-hand side of
     the geodesic deviation equation, Eq. (2.1), for this family of geodesics, at the point
     (s, t) = (0, 0).

 (b) (7 pts) Calculate the left-hand side of the geodesic deviation equation for this family
     of geodesics, again at (s, t) = (0, 0). Does your answer agree with what you found in
     part (a)?
      Hint: The calculation involves taking partial derivatives of xµ (s, t), but we only need
      the behavior of xµ (s, t) near the origin, (s, t) = (0, 0). So we can describe xµ (s, t) as a
      power series in s and t, and calculate the desired coefficients from the initial condition
      equations (3.2) and (3.3) and the geodesic equations of motion.

 (c) (10 pts) Eq. (2.4) holds for any smooth family of geodesics xµ (s, t), but it is much
     simpler for the cases in which the second term vanishes. The second term will not
     vanish for the family of geodesics described above. However, the term can be made
     to vanish by reparameterizing the family, replacing t by t̃, the distance along the
     geodesic curves, so that then T̃ µ ≡ ∂xµ /∂ t̃ is a unit vector, with T̃ 2 = 1. With this
     reparameterization, show that, at (s, t) = (0, 0), the second term in Eq. (2.4) vanishes,
     and evaluate the left-hand side and the first term on the right-hand side. Did you find
     that the equation holds?
