                 MASSACHUSETTS INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY
                            Physics Department

Physics 8.962: General Relativity                                                April 27, 2018
Prof. Alan Guth

                              PROBLEM SET 11
DUE DATE: Thursday, May 3, 2018, at 5:00 pm.
TOPICS COVERED AND RELEVANT LECTURES: The first problem concerns
  cosmic strings, and is an exercise in solving Einstein’s equations, understanding symme-
  tries, parallel transport around closed loops, and conical geometry. You may want to
  review the discussion of conical geometry in the solutions to Problem 1, parts (e)-(h),
  of Problem Set 3. Problems 2 and 3 concern Killing vectors, and Problem 4 concerns
  volume integrals in curved space.
MAXIMUM GRADE: This problem set has a total of 70 points.

PROBLEM 1: COSMIC STRINGS (30 pts)
       Cosmic strings are hypothetical massive stringlike objects that may have formed
   in the early universe. They are predicted by many (but not all) beyond-the-standard-
   model quantum field theories, where they arise as topologically stable twists in some
   of the fields. They can also arise in string theory, either as fundamental strings or as
   D-branes with one large (i.e., noncompactified) dimension. In either case, their thickness
   is so small that they can be treated for most purposes (including this problem) as one-
   dimensional objects. The metric for a single infinitely long straight cosmic string is
   static, invariant under rotation about the string, and also invariant under translation
   along its direction. These correspond to three Killing vector fields for the metric. If
   we ignore the coordinate that describes translations along the string, the geometry is
   equivalent to the metric around a massive particle in (2+1) dimensions (i.e., two space
   and one time dimensions). Assume that we have such a metric, which takes the form in
   the reduced 3D coordinate system

                            ds2 = −A(r) dt2 + B(r) dr2 + r2 dθ2                           (1.1)

   (with an additional term +F (r) dz 2 for the full 4D cosmic string metric).

 (a) [12 pts] Solve the vacuum equations and find the metric around the massive source
     assuming that the Ricci curvature tensor vanishes. (Hint: I recommend setting A(r) ≡
     e2α(r) and B(r) ≡ e2β(r) , and then following the template of Carroll’s derivation of the
     Schwarzschild metric, starting with Eq. (5.38) on p. 201.)
 (b) [4 pts] Use a change of coordinates to put the metric in the form

                                 ds2 = − dt2 + dr2 + C(r)r2 dθ2 .                         (1.2)

     Interpret the resulting metric and C(r) physically (or geometrically).

                                              1
8.962 General Relativity: Problem Set 11, Spring 2018                                      p. 2


 (c) [6 pts] Consider the metric on a spatial slice (t = constant) in the reduced 3D co-
     ordinate system. Use the relationship
                                     R 2        between curvature and parallel transport to
     determine the total curvature R 1ij dx dxj that must be contained in the region con-
                                              i

     taining the source if parallel transport counterclockwise around a single cosmic string
     rotates a vector by 2π/N counterclockwise, where we assume that the source produces
     nonzero Ricci curvature in a small nonsingular region in the vicinity of the origin.
     Write the metric (outside the source region) in this case.
 (d) [8 pts] Write the (3D) metric at a large distance from a configuration of k particles,
     assuming that k < N , and that each separately gives rise to the metric described
     in the previous part, and assuming that the particle positions and the metric are
     independent of time. What is the maximum number of such particles (or, equivalently,
     infinite parallel cosmic strings in the 4D picture) that can inhabit space-time? (Hint:
     with enough particles, the space outside of the region containing the particles looks like
     a cylinder, while the region containing the particles caps off one end of the cylinder
     like the tipR ofpa cigar.) With this maximum number of particles, what is the total
     curvature R |g|d2 x of a 2D spatial slice? (|g| = |det gij |) [Another hint: This is an
     example of the Gauss-Bonnet theorem (Carroll p. 143).]


PROBLEM 2: KILLING VECTOR IDENTITIES (15 pts)
       Carroll, Problem 3.12: Show that any Killing vector K µ satisfies the relations men-
   tioned in the text:
                           ∇µ ∇σ K ρ = Rρ σµν K ν    [10 pts] ,
                                                                                       (2.1)
                            K λ ∇λ R = 0              [5 pts] .

PROBLEM 3: KILLING VECTOR FIELDS FOR SPECIFIC SPACETIMES (15
  pts)
       Carroll, Problem 3.13: Find explicit expressions for a complete set of Killing vector
   fields for the following spaces:

 (a) [5 pts] Minkowski space, with metric
                                  ds2 = −dt2 + dx2 + dy 2 + dz 2 .                        (3.1)

 (b) [10 pts] A spacetime with coordinates {u, v, x, y} and metric
                         ds2 = −(du dv + dv du) + a2 (u)dx2 + b2 (u)dy 2 ,                (3.2)
     where a and b are unspecified functions of u. This represents a gravitational wave
     spacetime. (Hints, which you need not show: there are five Killing vectors in all, and
     all of them have a vanishing u component K u .)
     Be careful, in all of these cases, about the distinction between upper and lower indices.
8.962 General Relativity: Problem Set 11, Spring 2018                                     p. 3


PROBLEM 4: THE VOLUME OF A CLOSED UNIVERSE (10 pts)
     The metric for a Friedmann-Robertson-Walker closed universe, which we will learn
   more about later, can be written as

                                        dr2
                                                                 
                     2      2    2               2   2     2    2
                  ds = −dt + a (t)            + r (dθ + sin θ dφ ) ,            (4.1)
                                       1 − r2

   where a(t) is the scale factor, with units of length, which for this problem can be treated
   as a known function. Here θ and φ are the usual polar angles, with 0 ≤ θ ≤ π, and
   0 ≤ φ ≤ 2π. The radial variable r varies from 0 at one pole to 1 at the equator, and
   then there is a second hemisphere in which r also varies from 0 to 1. What is the total
   volume of the closed universe, as a function of t?
