94           17 Renormalization of Gauge Theories

so as not to invalidate Eq . (1 7,3 .5) . The infinite part of the Nth-order
term in the quantum effective action may therefore be written


where XN consists of terms from loop graphs, as well as from the term SIN
and various terms in F that involve S M and FA4 for M < N . For instance,
for N = 2 Eq. (17.3.8) give s

 X2 = S~ + 2(Fl, St) + (Ft, (FI, SR)) + two-loop terms involving only S R
      + one-loop terms involving S R , S1 and Fl .
For our purposes the only thing we need to know about X N is that it does
not involve SN or FN, and that it is invariant under any linearly realized
global symmetries of S R .
   Now, because (SR, SR) = 0, the operation F ~--* (SR , F) is nilpotent ; for
all F,

                                  (5R , (SR,F)) = 0 .                           (17.3.13)

Hence it follows from Eqs. (17.3 .9) and (1 7.3. 11 )-(1 7.3. 1 3) that
                                   (SRXN,c :) _ 0 .            (17.3 .14)

Any term in XN,,,, of the form (SR , Y) may be cancel le d i n Eq. ( 1 7.3 .12) by
choosing FN,,, equal to Y . Thus the space of possible re maining infinite
terms in XN,,,, that need to be cancelled by t he counterterm SN ~, co n sist
of those functionals X that sat isfy ( SR, X) = 0, coun t ing as equi va lent
fun ct ional s that differ only by terms of t he form (SR, Y)- In other wor d s,
the infinities in I'N that need to be cancelled by the counterterms SN
belong to the cnhnmoingy of t he mapping X ~-4 (SR, X)-
   The possible form of the counterterrn SN is limited by the requirement
th a t SR + SN mu s t satisfy wh atever structural constraint s are imposed on
the acti o n S . Th us we ca n complete the proof of reno rmalizability if we
ca n s how th at t he cohomology of the mappin g X ~--* (SR , X ) consists onl y
of functionals that satisfy this structural co n straint.
   In the case of quantum gravity coupled to the Yang-Mills fields of a
semisimple gauge symmetry, the symme tries of the theo ry are implemented
by the st ructura l cons t ra int (17.3.1). In thi s case the re is a th eorem tha t
states that the co homology of the mapp ing X ~-4 (SR, X) (on the space
of local fu nctionats, rather than space time-dependent fu nctions, of ghost
number zero) consists" of func tionals A[O] that are invarian t under the


  Strictly speaking, this is valid if one requires that the constant coefficients in S do
  not take special values for which S would be invariant under a larger group ❑f local
  symmetries . For instance, this excludes the case S = 0.
