                           17.4 Background Field Gauge                                   95

gauge transforma tion 0" -3 or + EA f A [0] wi t h s tructure constan ts f CAB .
Any Nth -order infinity of th is sort may be can ce lled with a counterterm
SN of the same form, so although these theories are not renormalizable
in the co n ventional power-counting sense, they are renormalizable in the
se n se that all infinities can be eliminated by a choice of par ame ters in th e
o rigi n al bare acti on 1[0] a nd by a su it a ble renorma l izat i on of fiel ds and
antifields.
   I n other theories the co homol ogy of t he map X ~-4 (SR, X) contains
addi tion a l te rm s. Thi s does not necessarily requi re a weakening of the
structura l constra ints, because th e addi ti onal terms in t h e cohomology may
no t cor respo nd to ac tu a l ult raviole t d ive rge nces. Fo r instance, in gauge
theo ries with U(1) factors the co h omol ogy conta in s terms4 corr esponding
to a redefinition of the ac ti on of the U( 1 ) gauge symmetry on the va ri ous
fields of the th eory, w hich if infinite would require us to weake n the
struct ural const ra ints by leaving the no rmalization of the t ra nsformat ion
functions f A [0] in Eq . (17.3 .1) arbitrary. But this in finity is forbidde n by
the same sof t-p ho ton theorems that tel l us that ra tios of U(1) cou plings
to various fie lds (like t he ratios of the various lepton charges in quantum
electrodyna mics) are unaffected by radiative corrections. (See Section
10.4.) Where the extra t erms in the cohom ology do contain ultraviolet
di vergences, it is necessa ry to weaken the structural constraint imposed o n
S in order t h at there should be a counterterm for eve ry poss i b le u ltraviol et
dive rgence. It is no t known whether this wi l l always be possible ; if n ot,
some theories may have to be rejected beca u se of their unremova bl e
ultr av i ol et diverge n ces.



                        17.4 Background Field Gauge

We next turn to a method of calculation that explicitly preserves a
sort of gauge invariance, and that therefore proves extremely conve-
nient, especially in one-loop calculations . We consider the effective action
17[A, W, w, co*] as a functional° of classical external gauge, matter, ghost
and antighost fields : A ,, (x), y3,,(x), cox(x), r~),,*(x) . Even though ghosts and
antighosts never appear in initial or final states, we are considering back-
ground ghost and antighost fields as well as gauge and matter fields in
order to deal with parts of diagrams that have external ghost or antighost
lines.


  We are now returning to the specific choice of the gauge-fixing functional B[f] as
  the Gaussian (15 .7.4), and we are integrating out the auxiliary field h , , so that the
  gauge-fixing term in the modified Lagrangian is just -fj,1 2~ .
