                   17.3 Re normalizatio n : General Gauge Theories                    91

where bIXay is a constant, antisymrnetric in a and P, which transforms
 as a tensor under global gauge transformations . (Such tensors exist for
any Lie group ; for instance, we could take bx flY to be proportional to
 C,,,fly . ) But the Faddeev-Popov-De Witt method cannot yield four-ghost
interactions in the Lagrangian, so there are no counterterms available to
absorb ultraviolet divergences in this term . This is not just a technical
obstacle to proving renormalizability ; for gauge-fixing functionals like
f0( = OP Aa + a~flyA IAy~, one-loop graphs actually do yield divergences in
four-ghost amplitudes that cannot be cancelled by counterterms in the
Faddeev-Popov-De Witt Lagrangian .
    Aside from avoiding gauge-fixing functionals other than         OU A)' , the
only solution to this problem seems to be the one mentioned in Section
15 .7 . We must give up the Faddeev-Popov-De Witt approach, and instead
take the action from the beginning as the most general renormalizable
function of the gauge, matter, ghost, and auxiliary fields that is invariant
under BRST and the other symmetries of the theory . According to the
arguments of Section 15 .8, the action can be written in the form 10 + 5 y
with I❑ ghost-free, and the S-matrix is independent of 1P, so we can justify
this procedure by quantizing the gauge theory in axial gauge, where ghosts
decouple, and then taking Y to be anything we like . In particular, we can
include s(w`w` w ) terms in the action that can serve as counterterms to
the divergences in four-ghost vertices .



           1 7.3      Renormalization : General Gauge Theories *

The proof of th e renormalizability of non-Abelian gauge t h eories in the
previous sec tion rel ied on a `b rute force' analysis of th e possible terms
in the action of dimension ality four o r less. Bu t as we saw in Chapter
12, this limi tation on the dimensiona lity of terms in the action can be at
best a goo d approximation . The successful renormaliza bl e quantum field
t heories that are u sed to describ e the strong, weak, and electromag ne tic
inter act io n s are almost cer tainly effec ti ve field theories, accompa nied with
term s of di mensionality d > 4 ; these terms are n ormall y n ot observed
because they a re suppressed by 4 - d powers of some very large mass,
perh aps of order 10I'- 101$ GeV. Gravitation too can be described by an
effective fie l d theory, in which the L agrangian density co ntai n s not only
the Ei n s te in-H ilbert t erm - ,,[g_R116rt G, but also all sca lars constructed
from fou r or more derivatives of the gr avit ational field . We need to


  This section lies somewhat ❑ut of the book's main line of development, and may be
  omitted in a first reading .
