“But the tale of history ,

forms a very strong bulwark

against the stream of time,

and to some extent checks

its irresistible flow, and, of

all things done in it, as

many as history has taken

over, it secures and binds

together, and does not allow

them to slip away into the

abyss of oblivion.”

Anna Comnena, The Alexiad
I HISTORICAL

INTRODUCTION

Physics is not a finished logical system. Rather, at any moment it spans a
great confusion of ideas, some that survive like folk epics from the heroic periods
of the past, and others that arise like utopian novels from our dim premonitions
of a future grand synthesis. The author of a book on physics can impose order on
this confusion by organizing his material in either of two ways: by recapitulating
its history, or by following his own best guess as to the ultimate logical structure
of physical law. Both methods are valuable; the great thing is not to confuse
physics with history, or history with physics.

This book sets out the theory of gravitation according to what I think is its
imner logic as a branch of physics, and not according to its historical development.
It is certainly a historical fact that when Albert Einstein was working out general
relativity, there was at hand a preexisting mathematical formalism, that of
Riemannian geometry, that he could and did take over whole. However, this
historical fact does not mean that the essence of general relativity necessarily
consists in the application of Riemannian geometry to physical space and time.
In my view, it is much more useful to regard general relativity above all asa theory
of gravitation, whose connection with geometry arises from the peculiar empirical
properties of gravitation, properties summarized by Einstein’s Principle of the
a atenee dele the ine se nore. Bor this reason, I have tried throughout

g rical objects, such as the metric, the
affine connection, and the curvature, until the use of these objects could be
Vite 2y considerations of playsios. The order of chapters here thus bears very

y:
