2 History of the Theory of Gravitation 11

i i try in his Géttingen inaugural lecture, Uber
what we now call Riemannian geometry ib
die Hypothesen, welche der Geometrie zu Grunde liegen. Subsequent wor! y
Christoffel, Ricci, Levi-Civita, Beltrami, and others developed Riemann’s ideas
into the beautiful mathematical structure described. in our chapters on tensor
analysis and curvature. However, it remained for Einstein to see the use physics
could make of non-Euclidean geometry.
2 History of the Theory of Gravitation

At the end of the Principia, Isaac Newton (1642-1727) described gravitation
as a cause that operates on the sun and planets “according to the quantity of solid
matter which they contain and propagates on all sides to immense distances,
decreasing always as the inverse square of the distances.”® There are two parts to
Newton’s law, which were discovered in different ways, and which played different
roles in the development of mechanics from Newton to Einstein.

It was of course Galileo Galilei (1564-1642) who discovered that bodies fall at a
rate independent of their mass. His tools were an inclined plane to slow the fall,
a water clock to measure its duration, and also a pendulum, to avoid rolling friction.
These observations were later improved by Christaan Huygens (1629-1695).
Newton could thus use his second law to conclude that the force exerted by
gravitation is proportional to the mass of the body om which it acts; the third
law then ensures that the force is also proportional to the mass of its source.

Newton was well aware that these conclusions might be only approximately
true, and that the “inertial mass” entering in his second law might not be precisely
the same as the “gravitational mass” appearing in the law of gravitation. If this
were the case, we would have to write Newton’s second law as

P= ma (1.2.1)
and write the law of gravitation as
F= mg (1.2.2)
where g is a field depending on position and other masses. The acceleration at a
given point would be
m
a= (™*) g (1.2.3)
m;
and would be different for bodies with different values for the ratio o /m;; in
Particular pendulums of equal length would have periods proportional to
(m;]m,)*/?. Newton tested this possibility by experiments with pendulums of
a ength but different composition, and found no difference in their periods.
1846) in 1890, T eter verified more accurately by Friedrich Wilhelm Bessel (1784—
- +hen, in 1889, Roland von Eétvés’ succeeded by a different method
