3 History of the Principle of Relativity 15
is no doubt that the first confirmation of his theory was that it predicted an excess
precession of precisely 43”/century.

3 History of the Principle of Relativity
Newtonian mechanics defined a family of reference frames, the so-called
inertial frames, within which the laws of nature take the form given in the Py incipit
For instance, the equations for a system of point particles interacting gravitationally
are
my ook = Gy Mum — Xn) (1.3.1)
dt? M |X — Xvi
where my is the mass of the Nth particle and xy is its Cartesian position vector
at time f. It is a simple matter to check that these equations take the same form
when written in terms of a new set of space-time coordinates:
x =Rkxt+vitd (1.3.2)
’v=mt+t
where v, d, and 7 are any real constants, and FR is any real orthogonal matrix. (If O
and O’ use the unprimed and primed coordinate system, respectively, then O’ sees
the O coordinate axes rotated by R, moving with velocity v, displaced at t = 0 by
d, and O’ sees the O clock running behind his own by a time t.) The transforma-
tions (1.3.2) form a 10-parameter group (three Euler angles in F, plus three com-
‘ponents each for v and d, plus one 7) today called the Galileo growp, and the
invariance of the laws of motion under such transformations is today called
Galilean invariance, or the Principle of Galilean Relativity.

What really impressed Newton about all this was that thére are a great many
more transformations that do not leave the equations of motion invariant. For
instance, (1.3.1) does not retain its form if we transform into an accelerating or a
rotating coordinate system, that is, if we let v or R depend on ¢. The equations of
motion can hold in their usual form in only a limited class of coordinate systems,
called inertial frames. What then determines which reference frames are inertial
frames? Newton answered that there must exist an absolute space, and that the
inertial frames were those at rest in absolute space, or in a state of uniform motion
with respect to absolute space. In his words! ®:

“Absolute space, in its own nature and with regard to anything external, always
remains similar and unmovable. Relative space is some movable dimension or
measure of absolute space, which our senses determine by its position with
respect to other bodies, and is commonly taken for absolute space,”
