3 History of the Principle of Relativity 19

of relativity in electrodynamics and mechanics was first set out in detail in 1905
instein?° (1879~1955).

by Tatts proposed that the Galilean transformation C82) show be
replaced with a different 10-parameter space-time transformation, ca ree * <r enka
transformation, that does leave Maxwell's equations and the speed o lig nt in-
variant. (It is not clear that Einstein was directly influenced by the Michelson-
Morley experiment itself,*! but he specifically refers to the unsuccessful attempts
to discover any motion of the earth relative to the ‘light medium’” in his 1905
paper.*”) The equations of Newtonian mechanics, such as Bq. (1.3.1), are not
invariant under Lorentz transformations; therefore Einstein was led to modify
the laws of motion so that they would be Lorentz-invariant. The new physics,
consisting of Maxwell’s electrodynamics and Einstein’s mechanics, then satisfied a
new principle of relativity, the Principle of Special Relativity, which says that all
physical equations must be invariant under Lorentz transformations. These
developments are discussed in detail in the next chapter.

The Lorentz group of transformations is not in any way larger than the
Galileo group, and therefore the principle of relativity was not originated by the
special theory of relativity, but rather restored by it. Before Maxwell, it might have
been supposed that all of physics is invariant under the Galileo group. Maxwell’s
equations were not invariant under this group, and for half a century it appeared
that only mechanics, not electrodynamics, obeys the principle of relativity. After
Kinstein, it was clear that the equations of both mechanics and electrodynamics
are invariant, but with respect to Lorentz transformations, not Galileo trans-
formations. The laws of physics in the form given them by Maxwell and Einstein
could. still only be true in a limited class of inertial reference frames, and the
question of what determines these inertial frames was as mysterious after 1905
as in 1686.
