3 History of the Principle of Relativity 17
The hypothesis, that there is some influence of “the mass of the Earth and the
other celestial bodies” which determines the inertial frames, is called Jlach’s
principle. .

There is a simple experiment that anyone can perform on a starry night, to
clarify the issues raised by Mach’s principle. First stand still, and let your arms
hang loose at your sides. Observe that the stars are more or less unmoving, and
that your arms hang more or less straight down. Then pirouette. The stars will
seem to rotate around the zenith, and at the same time your arms will be drawn
upward by centrifugal force. It would surely be a remarkable coincidence if the
inertial frame, in which your arms hung freely, just happened to be the reference
frame in which typical stars are at rest, unless there were some interaction between
the stars and you that determined your inertial frame.

This argument can be made more precise. The surface of the earth is not
exactly an inertial frame, and of course the rotation and revolution of the earth
give the stars an apparent motion, but these effects can be eliminated by using the
inertial frame defined by the solar system as a whole. In this inertial frame of
reference the average observed rotation of the galaxies with respect to any axis
through the sun is less than about 1 are-sec/century !?°

We seem to be faced with an unavoidable choice: Either we admit that there
is a Newtonian absolute space-time, which defines the inertial frames and with
respect to which typical galaxies happen to be at rest, or we must believe with
Mach that inertia is due to an interaction with the average mass of the universe.
And if Mach is right, then the acceleration given a particle by a given force ought
to depend not only on the presence of the fixed stars but also, very slightly, on the
distribution of matter in the immediate vicinity of the particle. We shall see in
Chapter 3 that Einstein’s equivalence principle gives an answer to the problem of
inertia that does not refer to a Newtonian absolute space and yet does not quite
agree with the conclusions of Mach. The issue is not closed.

Thave not yet mentioned special relativity because, despite its name, it really
does not affect the antinomy between absolute and relative space. However, we
shall have to formulate the equivalence principle in special-relativistic terms, so a
detailed review of special relativity is presented in the next chapter; for the
moment we only take a glance at its history.

The theory of electrodynamics presented in 1864 by James Clark Maxwell
(1831-1879) clearly did not satisfy the principle of Galilean relativity. For one
thing, Maxwell’s equations predict that the speed of light in vacuum is a universal
constant C, but if this is true in one coordinate system z', é, then it will not be true
in the “moving” coordinate system x", t' defined by the Galilean transformation

(1.3.2). Maxwell himself thought that electromagnetic waves were carried by a
medium, the luminiferous ether, so that his equations would hold in
limited class of Galilean inertial frames, that is, in those coordinate fj nt vost
with respect to the ether. , rames at rest

However, all attem : .
ether failed,?? even though the onrty, has # velooion of 80 be we vane 1 the

km/sec relative to the
