2 History of the Theory of Gravitation 13
Eétvés concluded from this that the difference of m,/m, for wood and platinum
was less than 107°. . segs
Einstein was very impressed with the observed equality of gr avitational and
inertial mass®, and as we shall see, it served him as a signpost toward the Pr inciple
of Equivalence. (It also sets very stringent limits on any possible nongravitational
forces that might exist. For instance, any new kind of electrostatic force in which
the number of nucleons plays the role of charge would have to be much weaker
than gravitation.°) In recent years a group under R. H. Dicke?® at Princeton has
improved on Eédtvés’ method, by using the gravitational field of the sun and the
earth’s centripetal acceleration toward the sun, rather than the rotation of the
earth, to produce the torque on the balance. The advantage is that the angle
between the direction of the sun and the balance arm changed with a 24-hr period,
and so Dicke could filter out of his data any noise not at the diurnal frequency. In
this way he concluded that “aluminum and gold fall toward the sun with the same
acceleration, the accelerations differing from each other by at most one part in
10.11” It has also been shown (with very much less precision) that neutrons fall
with the same acceleration as ordinary matter,’} and that the gravitational force
on electrons in copper is the same as on free electrons.*?
We now move on to the second part of Newton’s law of gravitation, which says
that the force decreases as the inverse square of the distance. This idea was not
entirely original with Newton. Johannus Scotus Erigena (c. 800-c. 877) had guessed
that heaviness and lightness vary with distance from the earth. This theory was
taken up by Adelard of Bath (twelfth century), who realized that a stone dropped
into a very deep well could fall no farther than the center of the earth. (Incidentally,
Adelard also translated Euclid from Arabic into Latin, thus making it available to
medieval Europe.) The first suggestion of an inverse-square law may have been
made around 1640 by Ismael Bullialdus (1605-1694). However, it was certainly
Newton who in 1665 or 1666 first deduced the inverse-square law from observa-
tions. He knew that the moon falls toward the earth a distance 0.0045 ft. each
second, and he knew that the moon is 60 earth radii away from the center of the
earth. Hence, if the gravitational force obeys an inverse-square law, then an apple
in Lincolnshire (which is 1 earth radius away from the center of the earth) should
fall in the first second 3600 times 0.0045 ft, or about 16 ft, in good agreement with
the measured value. However, Newton did not publish this calculation for twenty
years, because he did not know how to justify the fact that he had treated the earth
as ifits whole mass were concentrated at its center. Meanwhile, it became known to
several members of the Royal Society, including Edmund Halley (1656-1742)
Christopher Wren (1632-1723), and Robert Hooke (1635-1703), that Kepler’s third
law would imply an inverse-square law of force if the orbits of planets were circular
That 's, if the squares of the periods, 7?/v?, are proportional to the cubes of the
radii r°, then the centripetal acceleration v7 Iris proportional to 1/r?. However, t}
planets actually move on ellipses, not circles, and no one knew h "late
their centripetal acceleration. Under Halley’s instigati ow to calculate
; C gation, Newton in 1684 proved
that planets moving under the influence of an inverse-s pews
-Square-law force would
