1 History of Non-Euclidean Geometry 5
‘postulate with the statement hes is a triangle in which the sum of the three
cles i al to two right angles.” ;
aE he attempt to ‘ispense with Euclid’s fifth postulate began to take a different
direction in the eighteenth century. In 1733 the Jesuit Geralamo Saccheri published
a detailed study of what geometry would. be like if the fifth postulate were false.
He particularly examined the consequences of what he called the “hypothesis of
the acute angle,” that is, that “a straight line being given, there can be drawn a
perpendicular to it and a line cutting it at an acute angle, which do not intersect
each other.’? However, Saccheri did not really think that this is possible ; he still
believed in the logical necessity of the fifth postulate, and explored non-Euclidean
geometry only in the hope of eventually turning up a logical contradiction.
Similar tentative explorations of non-Euclidean geometry were begun by Lambert
and Legendre.

It seems to have been Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777-1855) who first had the
courage to accept non-Euclidean geometry as a logical possibility. His gradual
enlightenment is recorded in a series of letters* to W. Bolyai, Olbers, Schumacher,
Gerling, Taurinus, and Bessel, extending from 1799 to 1844. In a letter dated 1824
he begged Taurinus to keep silent about the “heretical opinions” he had revealed.
Gauss even went'to the extent of surveying a triangle*® in the Harz mountains
formed by Inselberg, Brocken, and Hoher Hagen to see if the sum of its interior
angles was 180°! (It was.) Then, in 1832, Gauss received a letter from his friend
Wolfgang Boélyai, describing the non-Euclidean geometry developed by his son,
Janos Bélyai (1802-1860), an Austrian army officer. He subsequently also learned
that a professor in the Kazan, Nikolai Ivanovich Lobachevski (1793-1856), had
obtained similar results in 1826.

Gauss, Bélyai, and Lobachevski had independently discovered what in modern
terms is called the two-dimensional space of constant negative curvature. Such spaces
are still very interesting; we shall see in the chapter on cosmography that the space
in which we actually live may be a three-dimensional space of constant curvature.
But to its discoverers the important thing about their new geometry was that it
describes an infinite two-dimensional space in which all of Euclid’s assumptions
are satisfied—except the fifth postulate! In this it is unique, which perhaps
explains why it was discovered more or less independently in Germany, Austria,
and Russia. (‘The surface of a sphere also satisfies Euclidean geometry without the
fifth postulate, but being finite it does not have room for parallel lines.) We shall
see in Chapter 13, on symmetric spaces, that the two-dimensional space of constant
negative curvature cannot be realized as a surface in ordinary three-dimensional
Euclidean space, which is doubtless why it took two millennia to find it. And of
course it also violates the alternative “common-sense” versions of Euclid’s fifth
Poshulate given by Proclos, Wallis, and Legendre—through a given point there

an be drawn infinitely many lines parallel to any given line; xo figures of different
size are Similar and the sum 4 the angles of any triangle is less than 180°,
owever; 1 still remained an open possibility that Euclid’s fifth postu
could be derived from the others, for it was not at all obvious that the seomety of
