3 History of the Principle of Relativity 19

of relativity in electrodynamics and mechanics was first set out in detail in 1905
instein?° (1879-1955).

°v Whatein ose that the Galilean transformation (1.3.2) should be
replaced with a different 10-parameter space-time transformation, called a Lon ent
transformation, that does leave Maxwell’s equations and the speed of light in-
variant. (It is not clear that Einstein was directly influenced by the Michelson-
Morley experiment itself,>* but he specifically refers to “the unsuccessful attempts
to discover any motion of the earth relative to the ‘light medium’” in his 1905
paper.°”) The equations of Newtonian mechanics, such as Hq. (1.3.1), are not
invariant under Lorentz transformations; therefore Einstein was led to modify
the laws of motion so that they would be Lorentz-invariant. The new physics,
consisting of Maxwell’s electrodynamics and Einstein’s mechanics, then satisfied a
new principle of relativity, the Principle of Special Relativity, which says that all
physical equations must be invariant under Lorentz transformations. These
developments are discussed in detail in the next chapter.

The Lorentz group of transformations is not in any way larger than the
Galileo group, and therefore the principle of relativity was not originated by the
special theory of relativity, but rather restored by it. Before Maxwell, it might have
been supposed that all of physics is invariant under the Galileo group. Maxwell’s
equations were not invariant under this group, and for half a century it appeared
that only mechanics, not electrodynamics, obeys the principle of relativity. After
Einstein, it was clear that the equations of both mechanics and electrodynamics
are invariant, but with respect to Lorentz transformations, not Galileo trans-
formations. The laws of physics in the form given them by Maxwell and Einstein
could still only be true in a limited class of inertial reference frames, and the
question of what determines these inertial frames was as mysterious after 1905
as in 1686.

It remained to construct a relativistic theory of gravitation. A crucial step
toward this goal was taken in 1907, when Einstein introduced the Principle of
Equivalence of Gravitation and Inertia,*> and used it to calculate the red shift of
light in a gravitational field. As we shall see in Chapter 3, this principle determines
the effects of gravitation on arbitrary physical systems, but it does not determine
the field equations for gravitation itself. Einstein tried to use the equivalence
principle in 1911 to calculate the deflection of light in the sun’s gravitational
field, ** but the structure of the field was not then correctly understood, and
Einstein's answer was one-half the “correct” general-relativistic result, derived
here in Chapter 8. A number of attempts were made in 1911-1912 by Einstein,?5
Abraham,** and Nordstrém3” to construct relativistic field equations for a sin, le
sealar gravitational field, but Einstein soon became dissatisfied with all such
theories, largely on aesthetic grounds. (‘The gravitational deflection of light by the
sun had not yet been measured.) A collaboration with the mathematician Nia J
Grossman led Einstein by 1913 to the view? that the gravitational field thy
identified with the 10 components of the metric tensor of Riemanni . vont pe
geometry. As discussed in Chapters 4 and 5, the Principle of Rquivalenes i
incorporated into this formalism through the requirement that the physical
