240 28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

udsv, cos(260,), udd vy sin(20,), uuser cos@,, and uude; sin @,, plus oth-
ers with quarks and leptons replaced with antiquarks and antileptons.
All other things being equal, the dominant decay modes are therefore
p > K+i, n > K%, p > Ket, and p > K°y', while the rates for the
decay modes p > nt¥, n> n°¥, p > 2%et, p > 2°, and n> net are
suppressed by factors sin* 6, = 0.05, though also enhanced somewhat by
the greater phase space available.

These considerations do not lead to definite predictions of branching
ratios, because in addition to all the factors mentioned above, the coef-
ficients generically called gs of the operators (28.7.3) may have a strong
dependence on the superfield flavors appearing in these operators. To
go further, one needs a specific theory for the generation of the dimen-
sion five operators. Most of the authors of Reference 42 concluded on
the basis of a supersymmetric version of SU(5) theories that proton and
bound neutron decay would be dominated by the processes p > KT¥
and n — K°y, but for a model based on SO(10) charged lepton modes
can become prominent. Also, in some models higgsino exchange can
compete with wino and bino exchange,” increasing the rate of p > KTV.
It seems a good idea in searches for baryon non-conservation to keep an
open mind as to the decay modes to be expected in proton or bound
neutron decay.

Of course, it is possible that all of these baryon non-conserving processes
are prohibited by some sort of conservation law. As mentioned in Section
28.1, string theory argues against baryon conservation being a fundamental
global continuous symmetry, but the baryon non-conserving operators
(28.7.3) may be forbidden by a Z3 multiplicative symmetry known as
baryon parity, under which the Q superfield is neutral; the H> and
D superfields are multiplied by the phase exp(iz/3), and the L, Hi, U,
and E superfields are multiplied by the opposite phase exp(—iz/3). This
symmetry is designed to allow the fundamental Yukawa couplings (28.1.2)
and (28.1.3) as well as the p-term (28.5.7) and the lepton non-conserving
terms (28.1.4) and (28.7.1), but it rules out the dimension four baryon non-
conserving term (28.1.5) and the dimension five baryon non-conserving
terms (28.7.3). This symmetry is spontaneously broken by the appearance
of vacuum expectation values of #9 and #8 (and perhaps the sneutrino
fields .V), and with no conservation law for R parity, there would be
nothing to keep the lightest supersymmetric particle stable.

Problems

1. Suppose that the interactions (28.1.4) and (28.1.5) were actually

present in the Lagrangian of a supersymmetric version of the
