28.7 Baryon and Lepton Non-Conservation 237
It might be thought that the greater strength of the gluino coupling
would make gluino exchange the dominant contribution to g¢. (Indeed, in
gauge-mediated supersymmetry-breaking theories, for moderate values of

the trace (28.6.3) and with g ~ g’, Eqs. (28.6.13)-(28.6.14) give

g2
Mgluino ~ Msquark © én2M #5
g?
Mwyino ~ Mslepton © Mbino ~ 16n2 M.,

where M, is a mass characterizing the messenger sector. Therefore in
such theories individual gluino exchange diagrams give contributions
proportional to g?/mgiuino, While wino or bino exchange (or, more pre-
cisely, chargino or neutralino exchange) makes a contribution propor-
tional to g?myino /Meauark> which is smaller by a factor roughly equal to
Mwino/Meluinogr * g*/g4.) However, there is a cancellation among the
diagrams for gluino exchange that strongly suppresses their contribution.
This was originally shown using a Fierz identity among four-fermion
operators,” but the same result can be obtained with no equations at
all. To conserve color, the coefficients of the operators (QQQL)g¢ and
(UUDE)z must be totally antisymmetric in the colors of the three quark
or antiquark superfields, and since these superfields are bosonic, they must
then also be antisymmetric in their flavors as well. Gluino interactions
are flavor-independent, so if we can neglect the flavor dependence of the
squark masses then the coefficients of the four-fermion d = 6 operators
will also be totally antisymmetric in flavor as well as color. Fermi statis-
tics then requires the coefficients of these operators to be also totally
antisymmetric in the spin indices of the quark or antiquark fields. But
the three quark or antiquark fields in the d = 6 operators derived by
gaugino exchange from QQQLz or (UUDE)g are all left-handed and
therefore have only two independent spin indices, so no coefficient can be
antisymmetric in all three spins. The contribution of gluino exchange to
the d = 6 operators would therefore vanish if the squark masses were all
equal and so this contribution is suppressed by the fractional differences
among the masses of the different squarks. According to Eq. (28.6.4), in
theories of gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking the fractional differ-
ences between the U and D squark masses are of order g’*/g4, so gluino
exchange between the antisquarks in the (VUDE) g operator generates a
dimension six four-fermion operator with a coefficient of the same order as
that generated by bino exchange. However, since gluinos conserve flavor
this operator like the (UUDE)g operator must be totally antisymmetric
in antiquark flavors, so that it must involve c or t quarks and therefore
cannot contribute directly to proton or bound neutron decay. On the other
hand, Eq. (28.6.4) indicates that the fractional mass differences among the
