238 28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

Q quarks of different flavors is much less than of order g*/g4, so that
gluino exchange between the squarks in the (QQQL)g¢ operator makes
a contribution to gs that is much smaller than wino or bino exchange.
We conclude that at least in the theories of gauge-mediated supersym-
metry breaking, gluino exchange makes a smaller contribution to proton
or bound neutron decay than wino or bino exchange. In other models
gluino exchange may make a contribution comparable to that of other
processes.*°

For g ~ g’ and myino © Mpino, the contribution of wino or bino exchange
to the dimension six operators is of order

2 .
g6 ee (28.7.4)

x M quark

where gs is a typical value of the couplings of the effective d = 5 interac-
tions (28.7.3). If the wino and squark masses have the same ratio (g”/g?)
as in theories of gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking, then this gives

~ 88s
26 Sn g2Mgauank (28.7.5)

The four-fermion qqq?¢-terms of dimensionality six in the effective La-
grangian are the same as those that had been supposed to generate
processes like proton decay in non-supersymmetric theories.*° They pro-
duce proton and bound neutron decay at a rate which on dimensional
grounds must be of the form

Ty =cnm} gz, (28.7.6)
where cy is a pure number that must be calculated by non-perturbative
calculations in quantum chromodynamics. Much work has gone into these
calculations, with results*! generally in the range cy ~ 3 x 1073+’,

To estimate gs, we note that it is not possible to produce ¥-terms like
(28.7.3) that involve only left-chiral superfields by the tree-approximation
exchange of gauge supermultiplets, which always interact with both left-
chiral superfields and their right-chiral complex conjugates. Thus the
interactions (28.7.3) arise in the tree approximation only from the ex-
change of particles of chiral superfields, and therefore gs is of the order
of g%./M?, where gr is a typical baryon and lepton non-conserving cou-
pling of some superheavy left-chiral superfield of mass Mr to the quark
and lepton superfields. To produce the interactions (28.7.3), these super-
heavy particles must be color triplets or antitriplets, and SU(2) triplets
or singlets. Whatever gauge group unifies the strong and electroweak
interactions presumably dictates some relation between the interactions of
the superheavy color triplet T and the familiar color singlet H; and H.
Then gr will be of the same order as the Yukawa coupling constants in
