                                        MAMA/337, NST3AS/337, MAAS/337

MAT3
MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                         Part III

Tuesday 17 June 2025   1:30 pm to 3:30 pm



                            PAPER 337


  APPLICATIONS OF QUANTUM FIELD THEORY

Before you begin please read these instructions carefully
   Candidates have TWO HOURS to complete the written examination.

                       Attempt ALL questions.
                  There are TWO questions in total.
                   The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                     SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                 None
Treasury tag
Script paper
Rough paper


             You may not start to read the questions
              printed on the subsequent pages until
              instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                                 2

1
        The different parts of this question are unrelated.

    (a) Consider a superfluid in three spatial dimensions in which a U (1) symmetry is
        spontaneously broken. Write down the Landau-Ginzburg effective Lagrangian for
        the complex order parameter ψ and show that the number density is conjugate to
        the phase. What does this imply for states with spontaneous symmetry breaking?

    (b) Let | ↑⟩ be the highest weight state of the spin S irreducible representation of SU (2).
        Define |g⟩ ≡ g| ↑⟩, where g is an element of SU (2) in this representation. Show that
                                          Z
                                             dg |g⟩⟨g| = c Id ,

        where Id is the unit operator in the representation and c is a constant that you do
        not need to determine. Use this result to obtain the coherent state path integral
        representation for ⟨g(t)|g(0)⟩ for a single non-interacting spin S degree of freedom,
        involving the Wess-Zumino term ⟨ dg dt |g⟩.
        By parametrising
                                     |g⟩ = e−iϕS3 e−iθS2 e−iψS3 | ↑⟩ ,
        obtain an explicit expression for the Wess-Zumino term in terms of the angles ϕ, θ, ψ.
        Show that the Wess-Zumino term in the path integral is independent of ψ and derive,
        from the path integral, why the coefficient S in this term must be quantised.

    (c) Recall that the retarded Green’s function of an operator A at temperature T and
        frequency ω is given by
                                       Z ∞                             
                           R
                          GAA (ω) = −i     dt eiωt Tr e−H/T [A(t), A(0)] .
                                          0

        Here H is the Hamiltonian of the system. There is no spatial dependence in this
        question. Obtain an expression for GR  AA (ω) in terms of a double sum over the
        eigenvalues En of the Hamiltonian H and the overlaps ⟨m|A(0)|n⟩ of the operator
        between the corresponding eigenstates of H.
                                               oscillator, where H = εa† a, with ε a constant.
        Consider the case of a simple harmonic √
        The raising operator acts as a† |n⟩ = n + 1|n + 1⟩. Obtain the retarded Green’s
        function for A = a† and interpret your result physically.




                                                                          Part III, Paper 337
                                               3

2
      This question is concerned with a system in three spatial dimensions with a Fermi
surface.

    (a) The low energy effective action for a spinless Fermi liquid is
                            Z                                             
                                                dψ(p)
                       S = dtd2 kdℓ iψ † (p)           − ℓvF (k)ψ † (p)ψ(p) .
                                                  dt
        Here k parametrise directions along the Fermi surface and ℓ is perpendicular to the
        Fermi surface. We have p = k + ℓ. The Fermi velocity is vF (k). Describe a scaling
        towards the Fermi surface under which this term is marginal. Consider a quadratic
        deformation, parametrised by the function µ(k),
                                       Z
                                 δS = dtd2 kdℓ µ(k)ψ † (p)ψ(p) .

        Is this deformation marginal, irrelevant or relevant? What is the effect of this term?
        Now consider a general quartic interaction and explain why it is irrelevant under
        this scaling. What is the condition on the momenta of the particles for a quartic
        interaction to be marginal? You do not need to discuss these cases in detail.
    (b) Compute the one-loop running of the BCS coupling. That is, given the interaction
                          Z
                  δS = V     dtd2 kd2 k ′ dℓdℓ′ δ(ℓ + ℓ′ )ψ † (p)ψ † (−p)ψ(p′ )ψ(−p′ ) ,

        with V a constant, consider the scattering of two fermions with momenta p and −p,
        both with (imaginary time) frequency ω. Use the imaginary time propagator
                                                           1
                                    ⟨ψ † ψ⟩(ω, p) =                ,
                                                      iω − vF (k)ℓ
        and assume that the Fermi surface has a symmetry such that vF (−k) = −vF (k).
        Show that the tree level answer for the scattering is V and that the one-loop
        correction exhibits a logarithmic divergence in ω. By resumming the logarithms,
        obtain an expression for the frequency scale ω at which an attractive coupling
        (V < 0) becomes strong. What will happen at that scale?
    (c) The zero temperature BCS gap equation is given by
                                    Z 2
                              1       d kdℓdω          1
                                  =                             .
                             |V |      (2π) ω + vF (k)2 ℓ2 + ∆2
                                           4   2

        Here V is the same constant as above. Obtain a formula for the gap ∆ in the limit
        in which ∆ is much smaller than any high energy cutoff scale that you need to
        introduce. How does your result relate to the strong coupling scale you obtained in
        the previous part of this question?



                                   END OF PAPER



Part III, Paper 337
