                                        MAMA/337, NST3AS/337, MAAS/337

MAT3
MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                          Part III

Tuesday 11 June 2024   9:00 am to 11:00 am



                            PAPER 337


  APPLICATIONS OF QUANTUM FIELD THEORY

Before you begin please read these instructions carefully
   Candidates have TWO HOURS to complete the written examination.

                     Attempt BOTH questions.
                  There are TWO questions in total.
                   The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                      SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                                  None
Treasury tag
Script paper
Rough paper



             You may not start to read the questions
              printed on the subsequent pages until
              instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                                   2

1
       Consider a system with d spatial dimensions with a conserved particle number N .
The possible spontaneous breaking of particle number symmetry can be captured by the
effective Landau-Ginzburg Lagrangian density for the complex order parameter Ψ:
                                      1
                    L = iΨ† ∂t Ψ −      ∂i Ψ† ∂i Ψ − rΨ† Ψ − λ(Ψ† Ψ)2 + · · · .
                                     2m
                                                           √
    (a) Write down the generator N in terms of Ψ. Set Ψ = ρe−iθ and obtain the effective
        Lagrangian density for ρ and θ. What is the physical meaning of ρ? What is the
        momentum conjugate to the phase
                                     R     θ? Obtain an uncertainty relation between the
        spatially uniform phase θ0 ≡ dd x θ and the particle number N . Briefly discuss
        the physical consequences of this uncertainty relation for spontaneous symmetry
        breaking.

    (b) At a classical level, what condition on the Landau-Ginzburg Lagrangian implies
        spontaneous symmetry breaking? Suppose that spontaneous symmetry breaking
        occurs and set ρ = ρ + δρ, with ρ the stable value (that you will need to determine).
        Expand the Landau-Ginzburg Lagrangian to quadratic order in δρ and θ.

    (c) Write down the path integral for the effective quadratic theory and integrate out
        the gapped mode δρ. You may freely use any results you know about Gaussian
        integrals and it is sufficient to work to leading exponential order. Take a long
        wavelength expansion of your result and thereby obtain the effective Lagrangian for
        the Goldstone boson. Write down the velocity of the Goldstone boson in terms of
        the parameters of the original Landau-Ginzburg theory.

    (d) Now heat the system up to temperatures T > 0. Let the classical symmetry breaking
        value of the phase be ⟨θ⟩ = 0. You may assume that the variance of the phase is
        given by                         Z
                                  2    1    dd k X         1
                                ⟨θ ⟩ =            T                .
                                       χ   (2π) d
                                                    ω
                                                      ωn + v 2 k 2
                                                       2
                                                            n

        Here χ and v are constants, the ωn are Matsubara frequencies and k is the
        d−dimensional spatial wavevector. Show, by considering a suitable contour integral
        of coth(πz)
            z 2 −a2
                    or otherwise, that
                                      ∞
                                      X        1           π coth(πa)
                                                       =              .
                                     n=−∞
                                            n2 + a2             a

        Thereby obtain an expression for ⟨θ2 ⟩ as a single integral over the magnitude k of
        the wavevector. Consider the possible dimensions d = 1, 2, 3. For which of these
        dimensions is the integral you have written finite? For which of these dimensions
        does spontaneous symmetry breaking occur at T > 0? Briefly justify your answer.

    (e) By subtracting off the temperature-independent short distance divergence, or
        otherwise, use your integral expression for ⟨θ2 ⟩ to estimate the temperature T at
        which thermal phase fluctuations restore the symmetry in d = 3.



                                                                            Part III, Paper 337
                                                  3

2
      This question is concerned with a ferromagnetic phase of a lattice system with an
SU (2) spin symmetry.

    (a) Explain briefly why the massless modes of the system will be described by a three-
        component vector n(x, t), with n · n = 1. What goes wrong if you try to write down
        a kinetic term in the effective Lagrangian for n that is first order in time derivatives?

    (b) Let ni = z † σ i z, where the σ i are Pauli matrices and z is a complex two-component
        vector obeying z † · z = 1. What redundancy exists in this parametrisation? Show
        that an SU (2) rotation of z corresponds to an SO(3) rotation of n. Thereby write
        down a rotationally invariant first order kinetic term in terms of z (the Wess-Zumino
        term). Show that the redundancy of the parametrisation corresponds to adding a
        total derivative term to the effective Lagrangian. [You are not required to fix the
        coefficient of the Wess-Zumino term in terms of the microscopic spin].

    (c) Using the parametrization                              
                                                  e−iϕ cos 2θ
                                         z=                         ,
                                                    sin 2θ
        obtain an explicit form for the Wess-Zumino term in the Lagrangian in terms of ϕ
        and θ. Write down a suitable spatial derivative term to complete the leading order
        effective Lagrangian.

    (d) Write n = (sin θ cos ϕ, sin θ sin ϕ, cos θ) and consider fluctuations ϕ = δϕ and
        θ = π2 − δθ. Obtain the quadratic effective Lagrangian for these fluctuations and
        thereby obtain the dispersion relation ω = ω(k) for linearized spin waves.

    (e) Write down the retarded Green’s function GR
                                                  δθδθ (ω, k) for the spin waves and the
        corresponding spectral weight ρ(ω, k).

    (f) Suppose that, at a small nonzero temperature T , the spectral weight does not change
        appreciably. State the fluctuation-dissipation theorem and use it to write down the
        corresponding structure factor S(ω, k) in the classical limit ω ≪ T . Perform a
        Fourier transform to obtain the real-time correlation function C(t, k).

    (g) Suppose that, at a slightly higher temperature, the spin wave acquires a decay rate
        Γ(k), in addition to its dispersion ω(k) obtained above. You may model Γ(k) as
        an additional imaginary part of the dispersion relation, but be careful to ensure a
        causal Green’s function. Incorporating this effect, obtain the static structure factor

                                                           T ω(k)Γ(k)
                               S(k) = lim S(ω, k) ∝                       .
                                       ω→0              (ω(k)2 + Γ(k)2 )2

        The constant of proportionality depends on the normalisation of the Lagrangian.

    (h) The static correlation function C(x) is the Fourier transform of S(k). Suppose that
        Γ = γk is linear in the wavevector, with γ a constant. Write down the leading large
        |x| behaviour of C(x) in this case – you need not perform the Fourier transform
        explicitly. Is this behaviour consistent with spontaneous symmetry breaking at this
        higher temperature?

Part III, Paper 337                                                           [TURN OVER]
     4

END OF PAPER




               Part III, Paper 337
