MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                        Part III

Thursday, 17 June, 2021   12:00 pm to 3:00 pm



                             PAPER 305


                  THE STANDARD MODEL

  Before you begin please read these instructions carefully

  Candidates have THREE HOURS to complete the written examination.

                Attempt no more than THREE questions.
                   There are FOUR questions in total.
                    The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                   SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                               None
Treasury tag
Script paper
Rough paper



              You may not start to read the questions
               printed on the subsequent pages until
               instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                                2

1
      Consider a vector field Xµ (x) of mass MX 6= 0.

(a) By quoting results for the representations of the Poincaré group, determine the number
    of degrees of freedom in Xµ defined by the number of polarisations of the corresponding
    one-particle states and show explicitly the difference with the massless case.

(b) Derive the propagator in momentum space for Xµ .

(c) Contrary to the Coulomb interactions V ∼ 1/r which are long range, show that this
    field being massive, mediates short range interactions (you may consider for simplicity
    the case of a massive scalar which is equivalent). Could you identify another example
    of short range interactions but mediated by a massless (MX = 0) vector field? Explain.

(d) If Xµ is originally a gauge field that becomes massive from the Higgs mechanism,
    briefly determine how it couples to fermions charged under the corresponding gauge
    symmetry and then show that these interactions reduce to the 4-Fermi interaction at
    energies smaller than the Xµ mass, MX . Determine the Fermi coupling in terms of
    MX .

(e) Describe the potential problem that a field theory of a massive vector field has
    regarding the breakdown of perturbative unitarity at high energies and outline how
    the presence of the Higgs field and its couplings can solve this problem.


2

(a) Define what is meant by an anomaly in field theory and explain the difference between
    anomalies for global and local symmetries.

(b) Consider a U (1) gauge theory for massless fermions ψ of charge e. Show that besides
                                                                                µ
    the conserved gauge current there is a classically conserved axial current Jax = ψ̄γ µ γ 5 ψ
    corresponding to the global U (1)ax transformation ψ → eiβγ5 ψ. Derive the expression
    for the U (1)ax anomaly and show that quantum mechanically the axial current change
    can be written as:
                                            µ       e2 αβγδ
                                       ∂µ Jax   =−         Fαβ Fγδ
                                                   16π 2
    where Fµν is the U (1) gauge field strength. [You may find useful the identity
    Tr {γ5 [γµ , γν ] [γρ , γσ ]} = 16 i µνρσ ].

(c) Show that the gauge symmetries of the Standard Model are free from anomalies.
    Determine why anomaly cancelation explains that the electric charges of the electron
    and the proton are equal and opposite.

[Recall that the quantum
                         numbers
                                 under SU (3)c × SU(2)L × U (1)Y for a family of matter
fields are 3, 2, 6 + 3̄, 1, 3 + 3̄, 1, − 13 + 1, 2, − 12 + (1, 1, − 1) + (1, 1, 0).]
                 1          2




                                                                           Part III, Paper 305
                                                3

3

(a) State and prove Goldstone’s theorem using both classical and quantum arguments
    (you may use without proof that the conserved charges Qa are quantum operators
    such that [φi , Qa ] = iTija φj with φi scalar fields transforming in the representation of
    the algebra generators Tija ).

(b) Consider an SU (3) gauge theory with gauge field Aµ (x) coupled to a scalar field Φ in
    the fundamental representation.
    (i) State how Aµ (x) transforms under a gauge transformation and prove that the
    corresponding field strength Fµν (x) is gauge covariant.
    (ii) Write down the most general renormalisable Lagrangian determining the couplings
    of Φ to the gauge fields, including kinetic terms for both fields and the scalar potential
    for Φ.
    (iii) Show that the symmetry may be broken by a non-vanishing vacuum expectation
    value for Φ. Determine the pattern of symmetry breaking and verify Goldstone’s
    theorem.
    (iv) Show explicitly how the Goldstone modes become the longitudinal modes of the
    original gauge field to give it a mass. Are there other massive states in this theory?


4

(a) By considering the couplings of the quark fields to the W ± gauge bosons and to
    the Higgs boson (Yukawa couplings), explain the origin of the Cabibbo-Kobayashi-
    Maskawa (CKM) matrix and determine its minimum number of free parameters.

(b) Show that the presence of a phase in the CKM matrix implies that CP is broken in
    electroweak interactions.

(c) Show that the θµνρσ GA   A
                          µν Gρσ term in the QCD Lagrangian also breaks CP and T but
    not CPT where GA µν is the field strength of the QCD gauge field.

(d) Explain clearly what is meant by the strong CP problem and outline one potential
    solution to this problem.

(e) Explain why the θ parameter for the weak interactions can always be rotated away.



                                    END OF PAPER




 Part III, Paper 305
