                                       MAMA/305, NST3AS/305, MAAS/305

MAT3
MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                          Part III

Wednesday 5 June 2024   1:30 pm to 4:30 pm



                           PAPER 305


                 THE STANDARD MODEL

Before you begin please read these instructions carefully
  Candidates have THREE HOURS to complete the written examination.

              Attempt no more than THREE questions.
                 There are FOUR questions in total.
                  The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                              None
Treasury tag
Script paper
Rough paper


             You may not start to read the questions
              printed on the subsequent pages until
              instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                                 2

1      A left-handed Weyl spinor ψL and a right-handed Weyl spinor ψR are governed by
the action
                   Z                                                          
             S = − d4 x iψ̄L σ̄ µ ∂µ ψL + iψ̄R σ µ ∂µ ψR − mψ̄R ψL − m⋆ ψ̄L ψR

with σ µ = (1, σ i ) and σ̄ µ = (1, −σ i ) and m ∈ C.
(i) Find an action of parity P : x 7→ −x on the spinors that leaves the action invariant.
(ii) Both spinors are subsequently coupled to a gauge field Aµ with charge +1. Find an
action of charge conjugation C on the gauge field and spinors that leaves the equations of
motion invariant.
(iii) The spinors interact with a complex scalar ϕ through the Yukawa couplings
                                Z                                 
                      SYuk = − d4 x λ1 ϕψL ψL + λ2 ϕψR ψR + h.c.

with λ1 , λ2 ∈ C. By considering the most general actions of P and C on the scalar ϕ
and the spinors, determine the conditions on λ1 and λ2 so that the theory is invariant (a)
under P and (b) under C.
(iv) The fermions interact through the couplings
                      Z
                                                                                      
           S4−fermi = d4 x g ψ̄L σ̄ µ ψL + g ′ ψ̄R σ µ ψR g ψ̄L σ̄µ ψL + g ′ ψ̄R σµ ψR

with g, g ′ ∈ R. What are the dimensions of g and g ′ ? What are the conditions on g and
g ′ so that this interaction respects parity?




                                                                             Part III, Paper 305
                                             3

2      A gauge theory has coupling g 2 which depends on the scale µ through the formula

                                  1      1     b0       Λ2U V
                                       =    −       log
                               g 2 (µ)   g02 3(4π)2      µ2

Here ΛU V is the UV cut-off and b0 is the coefficient of the one-loop beta function. For an
SU (Nc ) gauge theory, coupled to Nf Weyl fermions (either left-handed or right-handed)
and Ns scalars, all in the fundamental representation, the coefficient is given by
                                                  1
                                  b0 = 11Nc − Nf − Ns
                                                  2

(i) What does it mean for the theory to be asymptotically free? What is the condition on
Nf , Ns and Nc for asymptotic freedom?
(ii) If the theory is asymptotically free, define the strong coupling scale Λ. (For QCD, this
is the scale that is usually referred to as ΛQCD .)
(iii) What is the maximum number of generations Ng of the Standard Model for which the
SU (3) gauge group is asymptotically free? What is the maximum number of generations
for which the SU (2) gauge group is asymptotically free?
(iv) Denote the coupling constants for SU (3), SU (2) and U (1)Y as gs , gw and gY
respectively. Suppose that there exists a scale M for which
                                                    5
                                gs2 (M ) = gw
                                            2
                                              (M ) = gY2 (M )                             (†)
                                                    3
Show that the coupling constants measured at some other scale µ < M must obey
                                                                
                       1       1      bs − bw        3       1
                           − 2     = 3                   − 2
                    gs2 (µ) gw (µ)   5 bY − bw
                                                 5gY2 (µ) gw (µ)

where bs , bw and bY denote the coefficients of the one loop beta function for the respective
gauge groups.
(v) Show that U (1)Y × SU (2)w × SU (3)s is a subgroup of SU (5). By considering the
covariant derivative acting on a field in the fundamental representation of SU (5), explain
why one would expect the relationship (†) between couplings.




Part III, Paper 305                                                      [TURN OVER]
                                                4

3      Comment on the meaning and implications of a symmetry which has:

    • a gauge anomaly,

    • a chiral, or ABJ, anomaly,

    • a ’t Hooft anomaly.

Consider one generation of the Standard Model, with left- and right-handed Weyl fermions
transforming in the following representations of U (1) × SU (2) × SU (3):

       QL : (2, 3)q ,   LL : (2, 1)l ,     uR : (1, 3)u ,      dR : (1, 3)d ,   eR : (1, 1)x .

This is the usual set of representations (ignoring the right-handed neutrino), but with the
hypercharges q, l, u, d, and x left arbitrary. Assume that all hypercharges are integers i.e.
q, l, u, d, x ∈ Z

(i) Write down all the conditions for anomaly cancellation for a single generation, excluding
the mixed gauge-gravitational anomaly.
(ii) Argue that the anomaly relations require u − d = 2y for y ∈ Z.
(iii) Show that the anomaly conditions require integer solutions to 54q 3 + 18y 2 q + x3 = 0.
(iv) Assume that q ̸= 0. Argue that the anomaly conditions require solutions to
54 + 18ỹ 2 + x̃3 = 0 with x̃, ỹ ∈ Q.
(v) Show that there is a unique solution to the anomaly equations (up to scaling). If we
choose q = 1, what are the resulting hypercharges l, u, d, and x?
[You may assume, without proof, that there is no non-trivial solution to the equation
a3 + b3 = c3 , with a, b, c ∈ Z. You may also find the following change of variables useful:

                                      6                     3(v − w)
                            x̃ = −           and ỹ =                .]
                                     v+w                     v+w

(vi) Show that this solution automatically satisfies the mixed gauge-gravitational anomaly.




                                                                                Part III, Paper 305
                                             5

4     List the fermions in one generation of the Standard Model, including the right-
handed neutrino, and give their representations under the gauge group.
      Explain why it’s not possible to write down mass terms for the fermions but how,
with judiciously chosen quantum numbers for the Higgs boson, it is possible for them all
to gain a mass through Yukawa terms.
      Explain how the small observed value of the neutrino mass may be due to a large
Majorana mass for the right-handed neutrino. How is it possible to capture this same
physics in the absence of a right-handed neutrino?
      Suppose that the Standard Model is extended to include a complex scalar field ϕ,
transforming in the 3 of SU (2), a singlet under SU (3), and with hypercharge Y = +1.
What are the electric charges of the ϕ field after electroweak symmetry breaking?
      Write                                                
                                1          ϕ3    ϕ1 − iϕ2
                             ϕ=
                                2       ϕ1 + iϕ2   −ϕ3
with ϕ1 , ϕ2 , ϕ3 ∈ C. Find the components of ϕ that are uncharged under electromagnetism.
       Write down a gauge invariant Yukawa coupling between ϕ and the fermions of the
Standard Model. Show that if ϕ condenses without breaking electromagnetism then the
left-handed neutrino gets a Majorana mass.



                                 END OF PAPER




Part III, Paper 305
