MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                            Part III

Thursday, 9 June, 2022   9:00 am to 12:00 pm



                             PAPER 305


                  THE STANDARD MODEL

Before you begin please read these instructions carefully
  Candidates have THREE HOURS to complete the written examination.

               Attempt no more than THREE questions.
                  There are FOUR questions in total.
                   The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                   SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                               None
Treasury tag
Script paper
Rough paper



              You may not start to read the questions
               printed on the subsequent pages until
               instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                                 2

1
      Provide a short answer (less than roughly 8-10 lines) to each of the following
questions:

    (i) Explain why the strong and weak interactions are short range while electromagnetic
        interactions are long range.

 (ii) Explain what is meant by asymptotic freedom and ΛQCD and outline their import-
      ance.

 (iii) Explain why the approximate isospin and eightfold-way symmetries gave rise to QCD
       and why QCD explains both isospin and eightfold way. Why are there not higher
       approximate symmetries than the SU (3) of the eightfold-way?

 (iv) Explain the origin of baryon and lepton number conservation from the Standard
      Model.

 (v) Explain why the Higgs field provides a mass to quarks, leptons and gauge fields.
     Which Standard Model fields do not get a mass from the Higgs?

 (vi) Identify an operator of dimension 5 that gives a mass to the neutrinos and an operator
      of dimension 6 that may induce proton decay. What can we learn from this?

(vii) State what is meant by neutrino oscillations and why they are relevant to understand
      neutrino physics.

(viii) Give two reasons for the existence of an even number of quarks.


2
      Consider the unitary irreducible representations of the Poincaré group and write
the labels on the one-particle states for massless and massive particles.

    (i) Determine the number of degrees of freedom of massless and massive particles of
        helicity/spin equal to 0, 1/2, 1, 2 respectively. Identify the constraints, if any, needed
        to be imposed for fields φ(x), ψ(x), Aµ (x), hµν (x) respectively, in order to capture
        the appropriate number of degrees of freedom. For the massless field Aµ (x) state
        what is meant by a redundancy and relate this to gauge invariance.

 (ii) Describe what is meant by the Ward identity for matrix elements involving massless
      vector fields.

 (iii) Use the Ward identity in amplitudes with soft photons (|λ| = 1) to prove the
       conservation of charge. What can be said for helicities |λ| ⩾ 2?

 (iv) Outline a general problem for interacting massive spin 1 particles and how the
      Standard Model solves it.




                                                                            Part III, Paper 305
                                             3

3        Consider a theory of N scalar fields ϕn , n = 1, · · · , N invariant under the
infinitesimal global transformations δϕm = iαa Tamn ϕn , where Tmn
                                                                 a , a = 1, · · · , dim G are

the generators of the algebra of a compact continuous group G acting on the representation
of the fields ϕm and αa the parameters of the transformation. The symmetry under G
leads to a conserved Noether’s current Jµa .
                                                R
 (i) Show that the conserved charges Qa = d3 xJ0a are also the generators of the
     infinitesimal transformations δϕm = iαa [ϕm , Qa ] = iαa Tamn ϕn .

 (ii) Use these charges to define the order parameter for spontaneous symmetry breaking
      (SSB).

(iii) Show that if the symmetry is spontaneously broken, particle states related by the
      symmetry are not necessarily degenerate in energy and that the broken states Qa |0i
      are degenerate with the vacuum |0i.

(iv) State and prove Goldstone’s theorem.

 (v) Consider now the local symmetry G = U (1) with gauge field Aµ (x). Write down the
     most general renormalisable Lagrangian in 4-dimensions coupling the charged scalar
     field ϕ and Aµ . Identify the number of independent parameters in the Lagrangian
     density and establish the range of these parameters so that the theory is stable and
     manifests SSB. Consider fluctuations around the minimum and determine the masses
     and couplings of the physical particles. Based on this example explain what is meant
     by the Higgs mechanism.


4        Consider the Standard Model spectrum for which under SU (3)c × SU    (2)L × U2(1)
                                                                                           Y
                                                                           1
the components
                  of  each
                           family of  matter  fields transform  as  3, 2, 6   +  3̄, 1, 3 +
          1           1
 3̄, 1, − 3 + 1, 2, − 2 + (1, 1, − 1) including also a right handed neutrino (1, 1, 0).

 (i) Show that all the perturbative gauge and gravitational anomalies are cancelled with
     this spectrum.

 (ii) What would have gone wrong if the anomalies would not have cancelled?

(iii) Is baryon number anomalous? How significant is this?

(iv) By considering the couplings of the W ± and Higgs bosons to quarks define the
     Cabibbo-Kobayashi-Maskawa (CKM) matrix and determine the number of independ-
     ent parameters.

 (v) Show two different sources of CP violation in the Standard Model. Can they be
     related?


                                  END OF PAPER




Part III, Paper 305
