         MAMA/301, NST3AS/301, MAAS/301, NST3PHY/QFT, MAPY/QFT

MAT3
MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                          Part III

Thursday 30 May 2024   9:00 am to 12:00 pm



                           PAPER 301


               QUANTUM FIELD THEORY

Before you begin please read these instructions carefully
  Candidates have THREE HOURS to complete the written examination.

              Attempt no more than THREE questions.
                 There are FOUR questions in total.
                  The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                              None
Treasury tag
Script paper
Rough paper


             You may not start to read the questions
              printed on the subsequent pages until
              instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                               2

1        The Proca Lagrangian is
                                     1          1
                                L = − F µν Fµν + m2 Aµ Aµ ,
                                     4          2
which describes a massive gauge field. Here Fµν = ∂µ Aν − ∂ν Aµ , and m2 > 0.

    (a) Verify that this theory is not invariant under a standard gauge transformation of
        Aµ . Show that the equations of motion imply that
                                            
                                 ∂µ ∂ µ + m2 Aν = 0 , ∂µ Aµ = 0 .

    (b) Evaluate the energy-momentum tensor Tµν for the Proca Lagrangian. Show that,
        on-shell, the energy density is positive definite, up to a total spatial derivative.

    (c) Find the plane-wave solutions to the equations in part (a). Show that there are 3
        polarisation states.

    (d) Construct the propagator for the Proca field, that is, give an integral expression for

                               ∆µν (x − y) = ⟨Ω|T (Aµ (x)Aν (y)) |Ω⟩ .

        [Hint: Recall that the propagator is a Green’s function. Write the equation of motion
        for Aµ as Πµν Aν = 0, then define an appropriate inverse for the operator Πµν .]




                                                                         Part III, Paper 301
                                              3

2        Consider the following Lagrangian for a real scalar field in four dimensions
                                 1           1       g
                              L = ∂µ ϕ∂ µ ϕ − m2 ϕ2 − ϕ3 ,
                                 2           2       3!
where m and g are real positive constants.

    (a) What is the mass dimension of g? Briefly justify your answer.

    (b) What are the Feynman rules for a theory described by the Lagrangian L? A brief
        (but clear) explanation is sufficient, you do not need to derive the rules.

    (c) Consider a process in which there are two incoming states with momenta p1 and p2
        and three outgoing states with momenta ki , i = 1, 2, 3. Starting from the expression
        of the S-matrix in terms of creation and annihilation operators, relate the S-matrix
        for this process to a correlation function. In your derivation you may use the LSZ
        approach or Dyson’s formula.

    (d) Draw all connected tree diagrams that contribute to the process in part (c). For
        diagrams that differ only by permutations of the external particles, it is sufficient
        to give a single diagram as part of your answer, provided you also indicate clearly
        the possible permutations.

    (e) Based on the diagrams in part (d), and using Feynman rules, evaluate the contribu-
        tion to the S-matrix corresponding to each connected tree diagram. For diagrams
        that differ only by permutations of the external particles, it is sufficient to find
        the expression for a single diagram, provided you also indicate clearly the possible
        permutations.




Part III, Paper 301                                                       [TURN OVER]
                                                4

3

    (a) Consider scalar QED (SQED), a theory consisting of a complex scalar field φ of
        mass M and an electromagnetic gauge field Aµ , with the only interaction being
        due to minimal coupling between them, with coupling constant e. Write down the
        Lagrangian LSQED for this theory. Similarly, write down the Lagrangian LQED for
        a Dirac spinor field ψ of mass m minimally coupled to a gauge field Aµ . Give the
        form of the gauge transformations under which LSQED and LQED are invariant. For
        each theory, derive the Noether current jµ associated to the U (1) global symmetry
        obtained by taking the gauge parameter to be constant.

    (b) The charge conjugation operator Ĉ is defined to act on a complex scalar field
        operator by
                        Ĉ −1 φ(x) Ĉ = φ(x)† ,  Ĉ −1 φ(x)† Ĉ = φ(x) ,
        where Ĉ is linear and Ĉ † Ĉ = 1. Show that LSQED is invariant under charge
        conjugation provided Aµ transforms in a certain way, to be determined. You need
        not consider complications such as normal ordering arising from products of field
        operators.

    (c) The charge conjugation operator Ĉ is defined to act on a Dirac spinor field operator
        by
                        Ĉ −1 ψ(x) Ĉ = C ψ̄(x)T ,   Ĉ −1 ψ̄(x) Ĉ = ψ(x)T C
        where C is a 4 × 4 matrix that satisfies

                             C T = C −1 = −C ,        C −1 (γ µ )T C = −γ µ .

        Assuming that Aµ transforms as found in part (b), show that LQED is invariant
        under charge conjugation. [Hint: ψ̄M ψ = −ψ T M T ψ̄ T , for any matrix M . ] As in
        part (b), you need not consider complications such as normal ordering arising from
        products of field operators.

    (d) Given that the vacuum state |Ω⟩ for the theories defined by LSQED or LQED is
        invariant under charge conjugation, show that

                                 ⟨Ω|TAµ1 (x1 ) . . . Aµn (xn )|Ω⟩ = 0 ,
                                   ⟨Ω|Tjµ1 (x1 ) . . . jµn (xn )|Ω⟩ = 0 ,

        provided that n is odd, where jµ is the Noether current, as in part (a). You should
        prove that these results hold to all orders in the coupling constant, without making
        use of Feynman diagrams. What are the physical implications for scattering of
        photons in these theories?




                                                                                Part III, Paper 301
                                                    5

4       In this question uL (x) and uR (x) will denote 2-component Weyl (or chiral) spinor
fields that are left-handed and right-handed, respectively. We will also use the notation

                 σ µ = (12×2 , ⃗σ ) ,    σ̄ µ = (12×2 , −⃗σ ) ,     ⃗σ = (σ 1 , σ 2 , σ 3 ) ,

where 12×2 is the 2×2 identity matrix and σ i (i = 1, 2, 3) are the Pauli matrices. Standard
properties of the Pauli matrices, e.g. σ i σ j = δ ij 12×2 + iϵijk σ k , can be used without proof.
                                               χ = (χ1 , χ2 , χ3 ), the Weyl spinors transform
         Under a Lorentz boost with parameters ⃗
as
                              uL → e ⃗χ·⃗σ/2 uL ,       uR → e−⃗χ·⃗σ/2 uR ,                     (1)
                                     ⃗ = (φ1 , φ2 , φ3 ) they transform as
and under a rotation with parameters φ

                              uL → ei⃗φ·⃗σ/2 uL ,       uR → ei⃗φ·⃗σ/2 uR .                     (2)

     (a) State clearly how the Dirac matrices γ µ can be written in the Weyl representation
         in terms of σ µ and σ̄ µ , so that a Dirac spinor can be decomposed in terms of Weyl
         spinors as                                      
                                                      uL
                                               ψ=            .
                                                      uR
         Starting from the transformation properties of a Dirac spinor, which you should
         quote, verify that the transformation of uL and uR under a Lorentz boost is indeed
         given by (1), for a suitable choice of parameters.
         Using (1) and (2), check explicitly that u†L uR is invariant under the Lorentz group,
         and that iσ 2 u∗L transforms as a right-handed spinor under the Lorentz group.

     (b) Consider the following Lagrangian for a left-handed spinor field of mass m:
                                                    m † 2 ∗              
                            L = iu†L σ̄ µ ∂µ uL − i   uL σ uL − uTL σ 2 uL ,                    (⋆)
                                                    2
         where all spinor components anticommute.
         Show explicitly that this Lagrangian is Lorentz invariant, by considering transform-
         ations (1) and (2) with infinitesimal parameters χi and φi . You may use, without
         proof, that the required infinitesimal transformation of a vector V µ is

                             δV 0 = −χi V i ,       δV i = −χi V 0 − ϵijk φj V k .

         From the Lagrangian (⋆), derive the equations of motion for uL .
         Can this Lagrangian describe a massive spin-1/2 particle with non-zero electric
         charge? Give a brief justification for your answer.

     (c) Write down the Dirac Lagrangian for a Dirac spinor ψ of mass m. Show that, for
         an appropriate form of ψ which you should specify, the Dirac Lagrangian reduces
         to (⋆), up to a multiplicative constant and a total derivative.
         Similarly, show that the Dirac equation for ψ of this specified form reduces to the
         equation of motion found in part (b).



Part III, Paper 301                                                                    [TURN OVER]
     6

END OF PAPER




               Part III, Paper 301
