    Quantum Field Theory I (8.323) Spring 2023
                  Assignment 6
Mar. 14, 2023


   • Please remember to put your name at the top of your paper.


Readings

   • Peskin & Schroeder Chap. 4.1 – 4.6

   • Peskin & Schroeder Chap. 9.1–9.2


Notes:


  1. We showed that for a quantum field theory of real scalar φ, n-point time-ordered
     correlation functions can be expressed in terms of path integrals as

                      Gn (x1 , · · · , xn ) = hΩ|T
                                              R    (φ(x1 ) · · · φ(xn ))|Ωi
                                                Dφ eiS[φ] φ(x1 ) · · · φ(xn )
                                            =        R                               (1)
                                                       Dφ eiS[φ]

     where the path integrals of both upstairs and downstairs are defined by inte-
     grating over all configurations of φ(t, ~x) satisfying

                            lim φ(t, ~x) = 0,       lim φ(t, ~x) = 0 .               (2)
                           t→±∞                   |~
                                                   x|→∞


  2. In perturbation theory, it is convenient to express Gn in terms of free theory
     quantities as
                                       D                                 R∞         E
                                         0 T φ(x1 )φ(x2 ) · · · φ(xn )e−i −∞ HI dt 0
                 Gn (x1 , · · · xn ) =            D           R∞         E            (3)
                                                    0 T e−i −∞ HI dt 0

     Note that                      Z                Z
                                         4
                                        d x LI = −       dt HI                       (4)

     and we will use both these two forms.



                                             1
3. When we write expressions like
                         D                    R∞         E
                           0 T φ(x1 )φ(x2 )e−i −∞ HI dt 0                                        (5)
                                                                     R∞
   the time ordering includes both φ(x1 )φ(x2 ) and e−iR∞
                                                          −∞ HI dt .   One might be
                                                    −i −∞ HI dt
   puzzled by what we mean by time ordering of e         R∞      as there is a time
                                                       −i −∞ HI dt
   integral in the exponential. One should understand e              as a power series
   and then do time ordering inside the integrals. More explicitly,
                          ∞
                            (−i)n ∞
          R∞              X      Z
        −i −∞ HI dt
     Te               ≡                   dt1 dt2 · · · dtn T (HI (t1 )HI (t2 ) · · · HI (tn )) . (6)
                          n=0
                                n!   −∞


4. Peskin and Schroeder’s notion of connected diagrams, as discussed on p.97-p.98,
   is confusing and non-standard, as it includes diagrams with disconnected parts!
   To make things even more confusing, they use different notions of connected
   diagrams in Sec. 4.4 and Sec. 4.6. The definition of Sec. 4.6 (see p.114) is the
   same as that in lecture.
   Below by connected diagrams we mean diagrams with no disconnected parts.
   For example, among diagrams in eq (4.58) on p.99 of Peskin and Schroeder,
   only the first diagram in the second line and the diagrams in the third line are
   connected.

5. Some of you may have observed that some expressions for correlation functions
   I wrote down in lectures are divergent. You will also find divergences in various
   expressions you will write down in this pset. As is the case for the energy
   density of the free scalar field theory we already encountered, such divergences
   are ubiquitous in quantum field theories and reflect that a QFT has an infinite
   number of local degrees of freedom. We then have to understand two issues:

    (a) How to make sense of physical observables which are seemingly divergent.
   (b) Why we can do perturbation theory if the terms in perturbative series are
       divergent.

   The first issue is addressed by the program of renormalization, which is a math-
   ematical procedure for extracting unambiguous, finite answers out of apparently
   divergent expressions.
   The renormalization program, developed in late 1940’s and early 1950’s, was
   hugely successful in getting sensible answers which compared well with experi-
   ments. It, however, does not address the second issue.
   The second issue was only understood after the development of Wilson’s renor-
   malization group program in late 1960’s and early 1970’s.

                                              2
  Both these issues will be discussed in QFT2. In QFT1, we will only concern
  ourselves with the leading term in perturbative expansions of scattering ampli-
  tudes, which as we will see are not divergent.



Problem Set 6


1. Particle production by an external source: continued (10 points)
  Consider again Prob. 2 of Pset 4. Introduce
                   Z                                 Z
                           i d4 x L
                            R                              R 4
            Z[J] = Dφ e             , Z0 = Z[J = 0] = Dφ ei d x L0             (7)

  where L is given by equation (17) of pset 4, which we copy here for your con-
  venience
                      1           1
                L = − ∂µ φ∂ µ φ − m2 φ2 + J(x)φ = L0 + J(x)φ .              (8)
                      2           2
  Using similar tricks as we introduced in lecture to derive (1), you can show that

                                                 Z[J]
                              h0, +∞|0, −∞i =                                  (9)
                                                  Z0
  with an appropriate i prescription. I will not ask you to derive the above
  equation, but you should think about yourself how it can be derived.
  Using (9) to find the probability of no particle production

                              P0 = |h0, +∞|0, −∞i|2 .                         (10)

  by directly evaluating the path integrals (7). You should verify that it repro-
  duces the answer you obtained in part 2(h) of pset 4.

2. Connected diagrams (30 points)

  Below the notion of connected diagrams follows that defined in item 4 of Notes
  at the beginning.
  Consider the λφ4 theory discussed in lecture, i.e.
                                      Z
                                    λ
                              HI =       d3 x φ4 (x) .                        (11)
                                   4!




                                       3
   (a) List all connected diagrams for
                              D                    R∞          E
                                0|T φ(x1 )φ(x2 )e−i −∞ HI dt |0                  (12)

       to order O(λ2 ), and give the symmetry factor for each diagram.
       For diagrams at O(λ0 ) and O(λ) orders write down their expressions in
       both coordinate and momentum space.
       At order O(λ2 ) choose one diagram to write down its coordinate and mo-
       mentum space expressions.
       You do not need to evaluate the integrals.
   (b) List all connected diagrams of the four-point function
                    G4 (x1 , x2 , x3 , x4 ) = hΩ|T φ(x1 )φ(x2 )φ(x3 )φ(x4 )|Ωi   (13)
       to order O(λ2 ), and choose two of them to write down their respective
       expressions in both coordinate and momentum space. You do not need to
       do the integrals.

3. Vacuum diagrams (30 points)
  For λφ4 theory (11), consider the quantity
                                  D        R∞        E
                                        −i −∞ HI dt
                             Z0 = 0 T e             0                            (14)

  where the expectation value is evaluated in the free theory. We also assume
  that the free theory vacuum |0i is properly normalized, i.e. h0|0i = 1.

   (a) Consider
                                         W0 = log Z0 .                           (15)
       Show that W0 can be written in a form
                                       W0 = C − iεV T                            (16)
       where C is some constant independent of the spacetime volume, ε is the
       energy density difference between the full and free theories, and V T is the
       total spacetime volume. Note T = t − t0 where t → ∞ and t0 → −∞ are
       respectively upper and lower limits of the path integrals.
   (b) The Feynman diagrams in perturbative expansion of Z0 have no external
       lines, which are often called vacuum diagrams or vacuum bubbles. We thus
       say that Z0 is obtained by summing over vacuum diagrams. Show that W0
       is the sum of connected vacuum diagrams.
       Note that the statement in fact applies to all theories.
       Hint: consult discussion of Peskin and Schroeder on p.96-98. The discus-
       sion of Peskin and Schroeder is not great, but hopefully you can get the
       key idea and write down your own proof.

                                         4
   (c) Write down the expression for ε to order O(λ2 ). You can write it either
       in coordinate or momentum space. It is enough to write it formally as
       integrations of Feynman propagators. You do not need to evaluate the
       integrals.
       Note: the expression is divergent!

4. General n-point function (10 points)
  Prove that in evaluating n-point function (3), diagrams that contain factor(s) of
  vacuum diagrams all cancel. That is, Gn is obtained by summing all diagrams
  without any vacuum diagram factors. In lecture we saw a specific example of
  this cancellation when considering two-point function at order O(λ). Here you
  will see that the cancellation is not an accident.
  The statement is in fact is true for any HI . But it is enough if you could prove
  it for the λφ4 theory.
  Hint: Peskin and Schroeder gives a proof for the two-point function on p.96-98,
  which can be easily generalized to n-point functions. The discussion of Peskin
  and Schroeder is not great, but hopefully you can get the key idea and write
  down your own proof.




                                      5
MIT OpenCourseWare
https://ocw.mit.edu




8.323 Relativistic Quantum Field Theory I
Spring 2023




For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: https://ocw.mit.edu/terms.




                                                       4
