            29.4 Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories            285

quantum chromodynamics) to the appearance of vacuum expectation
values
    for gaugino bilinears,which would mean that the discretesymmetry
group Z2C, is spontaneously broken to itsZ2 subgroup, generated by a
simple sign change of the gaugino multiplet. Then there would be C\
zero-energy states |n),given by acting on any one vacuum state \X) with
the elements exp(innR/Ci) of Z2cP with n running only over the values
0, 1, ...,C\ — 1 because we treat as equivalent any pair of states that
differonly by action of the generator exp(i7r/?)of Z2. Since \X) can only
be a linear combination of states with even values of R, we can form
C\ stateswith allvalues 01 = 0, 2, ...,2C\ — 2 of R by taking the linear
combinations




In particular,for SU(N) and USp(2N) these statesare the same as the
Weyl-invariant statesencountered in the calculationof the Witten index
in the case where the state |0) is ^-invariant, and Weyl-invariant rather
than pseudoinvariant. The operator U defined by Eq. (29.4.12)has R = 2,
so there are r + 1 = C\ states Un\0) with R = 2n running from zero to
2r = 2C\ — 2. More generally,the presence of C\ zero-energy stateswith
the same statisticshelps to explain why the Witten index is equal to ±C\
for the exceptional and orthogonal as well as the unitary and symplectic
groups.
  The fact that the Witten index is non-vanishing for all pure gauge
supersymmetric theories means that to find examples of spontaneous
supersymmetry breaking we must add chiral superfields to the theory.
It does not help to add massive chiral superfields to the theory, since
for weak coupling the introduction of massive fieldsdoes not change
the menu of zero-energy states. We have already seen an example of
this: the work of Affleck, Dine, and Seiberg reviewed in Section 29.3
showed that an SU(NC) gauge theory with Nf < Nc left-chiral    superfields
Qai in the defining representation of SU(NC) and an equal number of
left-chiralsuperfieldsQai in the complex conjugate representation,with
a mass term YjaijmijQaiQaj>has Nc zero-energy bosonic states and no
zero-energy fermionic states.(This is one case where the Witten index is
not leftunchanged when a mass term vanishes, because this mass term
is the term in the superpotential of highest order in the superfields,so
that a vanishing mass changes the behavior of the superpotential for large
superfields.In fact,Eq. (29.3.31)shows that as the masses go to zero the
scalarfieldvalues in the stateof zero energy go to infinity.)
  On the other hand, there is no difficultyin finding theories with left-
chiral superfieldssubject to a symmetry that keeps them massless, in
which supersymmetry is dynamically broken. For instance, consider an
