            29.4 Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories            279

three generators of the 'standard'SU(2) subalgebra that was used in the
calculationof instanton effectsin Section 23.5, the structureconstant is
simply geABc- For the classicalgroups, we have

                    (   N           SU(N)
               Ci = I N-2           SO(N) for N > 3     .        (29.4.5)
                    { N + 1         USp(2N)

For SU(N) the rank is r = N - 1, while for USp(2N) itis r = N, so in
both cases r + 1 = C\. But SO(N) with N > 6 has rank r = (N - l)/2 =
(Ci +1)/2 for N odd and r = N/2 = (Ci +2)/2 for JV even, and the index
is Ci, not r + 1. Of course, thisdoes not affectthe main conclusion that,
since the Witten index is not zero, supersymmetry is not spontaneously
broken. Kac and Smilga showed in 1999 that the index is also equal to
C\ for exceptional groups.7 We shallcalculatethe Witten index here only
for SU(N) and USp(2N) supersymmetric gauge theories with no chiral
superfields,but in the course of thiscalculationwe willalso see why the
orthogonal and exceptional groups present specialdifficulties.
  The general strategy of thiscalculationis the same as for the Abelian
theoriesconsidered previously.We firstexamine the statesof zero energy,
to seeifthereare any that cannot be paired by action of the supersymmetry
generator.Ifthere are,then as long as the coupling isweak enough so that
the tree approximation gives a good qualitativepicture of the spectrum,
we know that these unpaired states really have precisely zero energy.
We can then find some non-zero weighted Witten index, which will be
constant even for stronger couplings, and conclude that supersymmetry is
not broken for any coupling strength.
  There is another complication here, that did not enter in the earlier
example of an Abelian theory with charged chiral superfields.As usually
formulated, general renormalizable theoriesof gauge bosons and gauginos
with no chiralsuperfieldsdo not contain any dimensionless parameters at
all,so that thereisno coupling parameter that can be adjusted to make the
couplings weak. Instead we have a running coupling constant, depending
on the ratioof the energy to a characteristicenergy scale A, likethe scale
A « 200 MeV for quantum chromodynamics          discussed in Section 18.7.
For non-Abelian theoriesthe gauge coupling constant becomes strong at
energies below A, however weak it may be at higher energies. But here
we are working in a box of volume L3, which provides an infraredcut-off
at an energy « 1/L, that is normally lacking in theories with unbroken
gauge symmetries. When we speak of a weakly coupled gauge theory,
itshould be understood that we mean one with a coupling that is small
down to energies of order 1/L. In this case, it is essentialto be able to
argue that supersymmetry isbroken for strong as well as weak couplings,
