252                  29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

discussed earlierinsures that thistrace can receive no contribution from
statesof non-zero energy. If the Witten index isnon-zero then there must
be some statesof zero energy, and so supersymmetry cannot be broken. In
particular,in a theory where the tree approximation gives n zero-energy
vacuum statesand no zero-energy fermions, the Witten index isn for weak
coupling, where the tree approximation can be trustedto give a qualitative
picture of the spectrum, and the index remains equal to n as the strength
of the coupling is increased,so we can be certainthat higher-order effects
or even non-perturbative effectsdo not break supersymmetry.
  As an example of the use of the Witten index, consider the Wess-Zumino
theory of a singlechiralsuperfieldwith a cubic polynomial superpotential
of the form (26.4.16):

                        M)    = im2d>2 + igcl>\

where <j>is the complex scalarfieldcomponent of the superfield.We saw
in Section 26.4 that thismodel does not exhibit supersymmetry breaking
in the tree approximation, but what about higher orders of perturbation
theory, and what about non-perturbative effects? Perturbation theory
gives a good approximation to the energy spectrum when m is large and
g is small; it tellsus that in this case there are two bosonic statesnear
zero energy, corresponding to the solutions <j>= 0 and <j>= —2m2/g of
the equation 3/(<£)/3<£= 0, and no fermionic states near zero energy;
the lowest-energy fermionic state is a zero-momentum     one-fermion state
of energy near |m|. In typical scalar fieldtheories we would not expect
the two bosonic statesto have preciselyzero energy; even though each
has zero energy in the tree approximation, higher-order effects(including
tunneling through the barrierbetween <j>= 0 and <j>= —2m2/g) would be
expected to mix them and shifttheir energies away from zero. (It is only
in the limitof infinitevolume that thisbarrierbecomes impassable.) But
in supersymmetric theories these statesmust have preciselyzero energy,
because there is no low-energy fermion state with which they could be
paired. Thus for m large and g small the Witten index is 2. Because
the Witten index is invariant under changes in the parameters of the
theory, the Witten index remains equal to 2 even when g is large,where
perturbation theory breaks down, and even when m vanishes, where the
two potential wells merge. (It is not easy to calculate the Witten index
directlyin this case, because of the presence in the tree approximation of
massless bosons as well as massless fermions.) Since the Witten index is
not zero, supersymmetry remains strictlyunbroken in the Wess-Zumino
model, whatever the values of itsparameters.
  The same arguments can generally be used in theories with several
chiralscalar superfieldsto show that the Witten index is positive,and that
supersymmetry isthereforenot spontaneously broken. The O'Raifeartaigh
