            29.4 Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories             277

  Let us startwith an Abelian gauge theory,the supersymmetric version of
quantum electrodynamics described in Section 27.5.This is a 17(1)gauge
theory with two chiral superfields0+ carrying (7(1) quantum numbers
±e9 and superpotential /(O) = mO+O—           We saw in Section 27.5 that
supersymmetry    isbroken  in the tree approximation ifwe include a Fayet-
Iliopoulos  term  £[V]d in  the Lagrangian density,so the Witten index is
zero for £ ^ 0 and small e, and hence also for all values of e and £,
including £ = 0. Is supersymmetry unbroken for £ = 0? It is unbroken in
the tree approximation, but how can we tellifhigher-order correctionsor
non-perturbative effectsgive the vacuum a finiteenergy in thiscase?
  To answer this we shall use a symmetry principle of the theory for
£ = 0, in the way that was described in general terms in Section 29.1.The
symmetry here is charge conjugation: the whole Lagrangian density is
invariant under the charge conjugation transformation of the chiraland
gauge superfields:
                  CO+C"1   = 0>+,       CKC"1   = -V.             (29.4.1)
There isa massless fermion in the tree approximation, the photino, but if
we take the vacuum to be even under C then the one-photino stateisodd
under C, so these statesare not relatedto each other by multiplicationwith
the supersymmetry generator. The chiralfermion here has mass m in the
tree approximation, so for small e itis not paired with the vacuum either.
With no fermionic state available to pair with, the vacuum state must
have strictlyzero energy, at leastfor e small enough so that perturbation
theory gives a good qualitativepicture of the spectrum. As we saw in
Section 29.1, the zero energy of the vacuum implies that supersymmetry
isnot broken. Likewise, the photino must be strictlymassless,since ithas
no bosonic statewith which to pair.
  Now, what about values of e that are so large that perturbation theory
cannot be trusted at all?The Witten index itselfis no help here, because
itvanishes.Instead,letus consider the weighted Witten index, TrC(—1)F.
We have seen that for small e and £ = 0 the vacuum has zero energy, and
thereare also two zero-energy statescontaining a zero-momentum photino
of spin up or down, and a bosonic zero-energy statecontaining two zero-
momentum     photinos of opposite spin. The vacuum makes a contribution
+1 to TrC(—1)F; the two one-photino states make a contribution +2
(because both C and (—1)F are —1); and the two-photino statemakes a
contribution +1, giving a weighted Witten index TrC(—1)F = 4. This is
independent of the value of e, so even for strong couplings the weighted
Witten index is 4, and so supersymmetry is not broken.
  There isa complication here.2In counting zero-momentum       statesin the
tree approximation, we have not considered the zero-momentum
       of the gauge field V^(x). A constant term in Vq(x) is no problem,
components
