            29.1 General Aspects of Supersymmetry Breaking             249

   The arguments that led to these resultsreliedon the supersymmetry
of the action; nothing depended on whether or not supersymmetry is
spontaneously broken, except perhaps for the assumption that the integral
(29.1.3)exists.In fact this assumption may be violated in theories with
massless fermions, which can have long range effects(or, equivalently,
poles at zero four-momentum) that would make thisintegralnot converge.
We willsee here that such massless fermions are necessary consequences of
supersymmetry breaking. In order to avoid the issueof the convergence of
thisintegraleven in theorieswith massless fermions, itis very convenient
to work in a space of finitevolume V. We can do thiswhile maintaining
translationinvariance by imposing periodic boundary conditions:allfields
are assumed to be unaffected by translationsof any spatialcoordinate xl
by an amount V1^.
   The existenceof an operator Qa that induces supersymmetric
         on quantum fieldswould allow us to derive allthe consequences of
transformations
supersymmetry, provided that there existsa supersymmetric vacuum state
|VAC) of zero three-momentum from which multiparticlestates may be
constructed by acting with fieldoperators. But if |VAC) is supersymmetric
in the sense that galVAC) = 0, then itfollows from the anticommutation
relation(25.2.36)that this state has zero energy as well as zero
      Conversely, by taking the vacuum expectation value of the positive
momentum.
operator (returning for a moment to two-component notation) {Qa, Q*},
we see that if the vacuum has zero energy then it must be annihilated
by Qa and Q*, and hence be supersymmetric, while ifitis not
supersymmetric
        then itsenergy must be positive-definite.  The question of whether
supersymmetry   isor is not spontaneously broken  is thus entirelya question
of whether  the vacuum  has a                 or
                              positive-definite  a zero  energy.
   The same reasoning led Witten to the conclusion that extended super-
symmetry with JV > 1 two-component spinor generators Qar and their
adjoints cannot be spontaneously broken to extended supersymmetry
with fewer generators or to simple supersymmetry, because if any one of
the generators does not annihilate the vacuum then the vacuum energy
cannot vanish, and it follows from this that none of the generators can
annihilatethe vacuum.1 Usually the energy of the vacuum state appears
as an ill-definedadditiveconstant in the energies of allstates,but here this
constant is given a meaning by the appearance of the energy-momentum
four-vector in the anticommutation relationsof supersymmetry. One of
the advantages of working in a finitevolume isthat itmakes itmeaningful
to talk about the totalenergy of the vacuum.
   Hughes, Liu, and Polchinski have pointed out that there are theories
that exhibit a sort of partly broken supersymmetry.la These theories do
not have a supersymmetry algebra of the sort described in Chapter 25.
Instead, they have an algebra of currents, based on anticommutation
