            29.1 General Aspects of Supersymmetry Breaking            251

same four-momentum, but for the moment itis enough to know that all
statesof non-zero energy may at leastbe grouped in these pairs.
  When supersymmetry isbroken we do not expect stateswith a definite
number of particlesto form supermultiplets with other statesof opposite
statisticsand with the same four-momentum        and the same number of
particles.The   pairing of statesthen  requires the existence of a massless
fermion, so that an n-particlestate can be paired with a state of the
same energy and momentum         but opposite statistics,consisting of the
same n particlestogether with a massless fermion of zero energy and
momentum.     This massless fermion is known as a goldstino.To be more
precise,any n-particlestate is accompanied with two statesof the same
energy and momentum       and opposite statistics,containing an additional
zero-momentum     goldstino  of spin up  or down, and with another state
of the same energy and momentum         and the same statistics, containing
two additionalzero-momentum                 of                In
                                  goldstinos opposite spin. particular,
when supersymmetry is spontaneously broken the vacuum statehas
     energy, so itmust be paired with a fermionic stateof the same energy
nonzero
and zero momentum;     more precisely,the vacuum and the statecontaining
two zero-momentum     goldstinos are paired with the two statesof a single
zero-momentum     goldstino. It is only when supersymmetry is unbroken
that there isa stateof zero energy, the vacuum, that can be unpaired.
  The pairing of statesof non-zero energy provides a valuable diagnostic
toolthat can in some cases tellus that supersymmetry isnot spontaneously
broken, even where perturbation theory is not adequate to answer this
question. When all interactionsare weak, we can rely on perturbation
theory to give us a qualitativepicture of the spectrum. If itturns out that
in the tree approximation there are n vacuum stateswith zero energy, and
no massless fermions, then we can be confident that for weak coupling
there are no zero-energy fermionic stateswith which we could pair the n
vacuum states,so these unpaired stateswould have to have preciselyzero
energy. Then, as we increase the strength of the couplings or vary the
parameters of the theory in any other way, statesmay move from positive
to zero energy or vice-versa,but they will generally not suddenly appear
or disappear. (There is an exception for changes in the parameters that
change the asymptotic behavior of the Lagrangian for large fields;as we
will shortlysee,thiscan produce or destroy states.)Because each stateof
non-zero energy is always paired with another of opposite statistics,  they
can only make the transitionfrom zero to non-zero energy or vice-versain
such pairs,so the number of bosonic zero-energy statesminus the number
of fermionic zero-energy statesdoes not change as the parameters of the
theory are varied,as long as the large-fieldbehavior of the Lagrangian is
not changed. This differenceisknown as the Witten index? Formally, this
index is Tr(—1)F, where F is the fermion number; the pairing of states
