            29.4 Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories            281

symplectic groups and their direct products this is the only way that it
can be satisfied.The same istrue for the orthogonal gauge algebras O(N)
with N < 6, which are all equivalent to symplectic and/or unitary Lie
algebras (see the Appendix to Chapter 15),but not for orthogonal gauge
algebras O(N) with N > 7, which is why Witten's original calculation
needed correctionfor thiscase.
   In the restof thiscalculationwe will only consider gauge algebras like
the symplectic and unitary algebras for which the condition of zero energy
in the tree approximation does require the Vsi to vanish for alli except
where ts is in a Cartan subalgebra of the gauge Lie algebra. With all
Va% = 0 except for the V^i for which tj is in the Cartan subalgebra, the
zero-energy modes of the fermion fieldare those also with Xa = 0, except
for the Xtf for which tj isin the Cartan subalgebra.
   Now we must count these states. The eigenvalues of the tj in any
representation of a semi-simple Lie algebra are quantized, so by gauge
transformations allvalues of the non-zero gauge fieldsV^\ are equivalent
to values in a finitebox with periodic boundary conditions. The
quantization
        of these modes is just like that carried out for the gauge fieldin
the U(l) model considered above, so the zero-energy stateof these fields
is again unique, with a constant wave function in the box.
   The multiplicityof stateswith zero energy in the tree approximation
comes entirely from the fermion degrees of freedom. It is convenient
to use a two-component notation, in which instead of a four-component
Majorana field A^a for each generator of the Cartan subalgebra, we
have two left-handed fieldsX^La with a = +1/2, and their right-handed
Hermitian adjoints X^La. These gaugino fields satisfy the canonical
anticommutation relations


and



By operating on an arbitrarystatevector with as many factorsof X^La as
necessary,we can construct a statevector |0) which is annihilated by all
ArfLa- The general zero-energy state vector is then a linearcombination
of products of the X^La acting on |0).
  To see which of these statesmay be paired with each other by the action
of the supersymmetry generator, we must take account of a symmetry of
the theory. The zero-energy condition, that the gauge and gaugino fields
lieonly in directionscorresponding to the Cartan subalgebra, isinvariant
under the subgroup of the originalgauge group consisting of elements h
that leaves this subalgebra invariant,that is,for which h~xt^h is a linear
combination of the t@. These form a finitegroup, known as the Weyl
