                   1.2 The Birth of Quantum Field Theory 1 9

The first term is interpreted as the contribution of induced emission, and
the second term as the contribution of spontaneous emission . Hence,
without any appeal to thermodynamics, Dirac could conclude that the
ratio of the rates uB for induced emission and A for spontaneous emission
is given by the Einstein relation, Eq . (1 .12 1). Using his earlier result (1 .2.20)
for B, Dirac was thus able to rederive the Born-Jordan formula" (1 .2.19)
for spontaneous emission rate A . A little later, similar methods were
used by Dirac to give a quantum mechanical treatment of the scattering
of radiation and the lifetime of excited atomic states,3 6 and by Victor
Weisskopf and Eugene Wigner to make a detailed study of spectral line
shapes.Y" Dirac in his work was separating the electromagnetic potential
into a radiation field A and a static Coulomb potential A°, in a manner
which did not preserve the manifest Lorentz and gauge invariance of
classical electrodynamics . These matters were put on a firmer foundation
a little later by Enrico Fermi .16~ Many physicists in the 1930s learned
their quantum electrodynamics from Fermi's 1932 review .
   The use of canonical commutation relations for q and p or a and a t
also raised a question as to the Lorentz invariance of the quantized theory .
Jordan and Pauli37 in 1928 were able to show that the commutators of
fields at different spacetime points were in fact Lorentz-invariant . (These
commutators are calculated in Chapter 5.) Somewhat later, Bohr and
Lean RasenfelP used a number of ingenious thought experiments to
show that these commutation relations express limitations on our ability
to measure fields at spacetime points separated by time-like intervals .
    It was not long after the successful quantization of the electromagnetic
field that these techniques were applied to other fields . At first this was
regarded as a `second quantization' ; the fields to be quantized were the
wave functions used in one-particle quantum mechanics, such as the Dirac
wave function of the electron . The first step in this direction seems to
have been taken in 1927 by Jordan.39 I n 1 921$ an essential element was
supplied by Jordan and Vdigner .4° They recognized that the Pauli exclusion
principle prevents the occupation number n k of electrons in any normal
mode k (counting spin as well as position variables) from taking any values
other than 0 or 1 . The electron field therefore cannot be expanded as a
superposition of operators satisfying the commutation relations (1 .2.10),
(1 .2.12), because these relations require ray to take all integer values from
0 to oc.. Instead, they proposed that the electron field should be expanded
in a sum of operators a k , a k satisfying the anticommutation relations

                                a k C~~ + at ak = 6jk ( 1 .122)
                                Clk aj + afar = 0 .  (1 .123)

The relations can be satisfied by matrices labelled by a set of integers
