20                         1 Historical Introduction

n1 , ra2 1 . . . , one for each normal mode, each integer taking just the value s
zero and one :
                              I   n~   0, nk = 1, n' = r~j for j * k
                                                                         (1 .2.24)
                             1 n fk =1, nk =0,nf~ = nffor j 4 k
                                                                         ( 1 . 2.2 5)
                             0 otherwise .

For instance, for a single normal mode we have just two rows and two
columns, corresponding to the values unity and zero of n' and n ; the a
and at matrices take the for m
                    1 0      0         -~           a1
                                         a
                  ~T 1       0                     [0 Q

The reader may check that (1 .2 .24) and (1 .225) do satisfy the anticommu-
tation relations (1 .2 .2) and ( 1 .2.2 3).
   The interpretation of a column vector characterized by integers n1, '12, . . .
is that it represents a state with nk quanta in each normal mode k, just as
for bosons . The difference is, of course, that since each nk takes only the
values 0 and 1, there can be at most one quantum in each normal mode,
as required by the Pauli exclusion principle . Again, ak destroys a quantum
in normal mode k if there is one there already, and otherwise gives zero ;
also, a t creates a quantum in normal mode k unless there is one there
already, in which case it gives zero . Much later it was shown by Fier
and Pauli401 that the choice between commutation and anticommutation
relations is dictated solely by the particle's spin : commutators must be
used for particles with integer spin like the photon, and anticommutators
for particles with half-integer spin like the plectron, (This will be shown
in a different way in Chapter 5 .)
   The theory of general quantum fields was first laid out in 1 929, in a
pair of comprehensive articles by Heisenberg and Pauli .4i The starting
point ❑ f their work was the application of the canonical formalism to
the fields themselves, rather than to the coefficients of the normal modes
appearing in the fields . Heisenberg and Pauli took the Lagrangian L as
the space-integral of a local function of fields and spacetime derivatives
of fields ; the field equations were then determined from the principle
that the action f Ldt should be stationary when the fields are varied ;
and the commutation relations were determined from the assumption
that the variational derivative of the Lagrangian with respect to any
field's time-derivative behaves like a `momentum' conjugate to that field
(except that commutation relations become anticommutation relations for
fermion fields . They also went on to apply this general formalism to the
electromagnetic and Dirac fields, and explored the various invariance and
