                 1 .2 The Birth of' Quantum Field Thenry.               23

the electron field unlike the electromagnetic field did not have a classical
limit, so there were doubts about its physical significance . Also, Dirac¢2a
conceived of fields as the means by which we observe particles, so that
he did not expect particles and fields to be described in the same terms .
Though I do not know whether it bothered anyone at the time, there was
a more practical disadvantage of the many-time formalism : it would have
been difficult to use it to describe a process like nuclear beta decay, in
which an electron and antineutrino are created without an accompanying
positron or neutrino. The successful calculation by Fermi43 of the electron
energy distribution in beta decay deserves to be counted as one of the
early triumphs of quantum field theory .
   The essential idea that was needed to demonstrate the equivalence of
the Dirac hole theory with a quantum field theory of the electron was
provided by Fock4" and by Wendell Furry and Oppenheimer44 in 1933 .
To appreciate this idea from a more modern standpoint, suppose we try
to construct an plectron field in analogy with the electromagnetic field or
the Barn-Heisenberg-Jordan field (1 .2.2) . Since electrons carry a charge,
we would not like to mix annihilation and creation operators, so we might
try to write the field as



where uk (x)eya"'kr are a complete set of orthonormal plane-wave solutions
of the Dirac equation (1 . 1 . 13) {with k now labelling the three-momentum,
spin, and sign of the energy) :
                                 u k _ h r,UkU k a        (L2.35)
                               - i h c~e - V + a 4 rnc- X1 .2.39}
                             f u~~s e dux = 6k(           ( 1 .2.40)
and uk are the corresponding annihilation operators, satisfying the Jordan-
Wigner anticommutation relations ( 1 .2.22)-(1 .2.23 ). According to the
ideas of `second quantization' or the canonical quantization procedure
of Heisenberg and Pauli,41 the Hamiltonian is formed by calculating the
`expectation value' of with a `wave function' replaced by the quantized
field (1 .2.37)
                                   t       V, =
                     H = /d3x          .              ~am k akak .   (1 .2.41)
                                                  k
The trouble is, of course, that this is not a positive operator -half the c )k
are negative while the operators a~ak take only the positive eigenr~alues
I and D . (See Eqs . (1 .2.24) and (1 .2.25) .) In order to cure this disease,
Furry and Oppenheimer picked up Dirac's idea42 that the positron is the
absence of a negative-energy electron ; the anticommutation relations are
