28                  1 Historical Introductio n

  However, in a sense this problem appears in quantum field theory for
spin 1/2 as well as spin zero . The density operator ~ tyr of Dirac is
indeed a positive operator, but in order to construct a physical density
we ought to subtract the contribution of the filled electron states . In
particular, using the plane-wave decomposition (1 .2.43), we may write the
total number operator as

           N = j dux tp'q) - t+) a fi (k ) a (k) + 1: (- ) b( k ) b '(k )
                                   k                     k
The anticommutation relations for the b s allow us to rewrite this as
                     N - No = E Wa ak                  (-)b klbk            (1 .2 .71)
                              k   k                k
where No is the infinite constant


                                          k
According to Eqs. (1 .2.46) and (1 .2 .47), No is the number of particles
in the vacuum, so Furry and Oppenheimer reasoned that the physical
number operator is N - No, and this now has both negative and positive
eigenvalues, just as for spin zero .
   The solution to this problem provided by quantum field theory is that
neither the y) ❑f furry and Oppenheimer nor the 0 of Pauli and Weisskopf
are probability amplitudes, which would have to define conserved positive
probability densities. instead, the physical Hilbert space is spanned by
states defined as containing definite numbers of particles and/or antipar-
ticles in each mode. If (Dn are a complete orthonormal set of such states,
then a measurement of particle numbers in an arbitrary state T will yield
a probability for finding the system in state (D, , given by


where ( (DM,T) is the usual Hilbert space scalar product. Hence, no question
as to the possibility of negative probabilities will arise for any spin . The
wave fields 0, ya, etc, are not probability amplitudes at all, but operators
which create or destroy particles in the various normal modes . It would
be a good thing if the misleading expression `second quantization' were
permanently retired ,
   In particular, the operators N and N - No of Eqs . ( 1 .2 .74) and (1 .2 .71)
are not to be interpreted as total probabilities, but as number operators :
specifically, the number of particles minus the number of antiparticles . For
charged particles, the conservation of charge forces the charge operators to
be proportional to these number operators, so the minus signs in ( 1 . 2.70)
and- (1 .2.71) allow us immediately to conclude that particles and antipar-
ticles have opposite charge. In this field-theoretic formalism, interactions
