                  1 .2 The Birth ofQua ntum Field Theory 2 9

contrib ute terms to the Hamil tonian which are of third, fourth, or higher
order in field variables, and the rates of various processes are given by
using these interaction operators in a time-dependent perturbation theory .
The conceptual framework described in the above brief remarks will serve
as the basi s for much of the work in this book.
   Despite its apparent advantages, quantum field theory did not imme-
diately supplant hole theory ; rather, the two points of view coexisted for
a while, and various combinations of field-theoretic and hole-theoretic
ideas were used in calculations of physical reaction rates . This period saw
a number of calculations of cross sections to lowest order in powers of
e 2 for various processes, such as eT + y ~ e- + ,/ in 1929 by Klein and
NXShina. ;46 e++ e- --* 2,i in 1930 by Dirac ; 47 e- + e ~ e- +e- in 1932 b y
   oller;48 e- +Z --* e- + y +Z and y + Z ---~ e++ e- +Z (where Z denotes
the Coulomb field of a heavy atom) in 1934 by Bethe and Heider ; 49 and
e+ +e- --* e+ + e- in 1936 by Bb abha .$° (Rules for the calculation of such
processes are g iven in Chapter 8, and worked out in detail the re for the
case of electron-photon scattering .) These lowest-order calculations gave
finite results, in reasonable agreement with the experimental data .
   Nevertheless, a general feeling of dissatisfaction with quantum field
theory (whether or not in the form of hole theory) persisted throughout
the 1930s . One of the reasons for this was the apparent failure of
quantum electrodynamics to account for the penet rating power of the
charged particles in cosmic ray showers, noted in 1936 by Oppenheimer
and Franklin Ca I'1SOn .50Q Another cause of dissatisfaction that turned
out to be related to the first was the steady discovery of new kinds
of particles and interactions . We have already mentioned the electron,
photon, positron, neutrino, and, of course, the nucleus of hydrogen, the
proton . Throughout the 1920s it was generally believed that heavier nuclei
are composed of protons and electrons, but it was hard to see how a light
particle like the electron could be confined in the nucleus . Anot her severe
difficulty with this picture was pointed out in 1931 by Ehrenfest and
Oppenheimer :" the ❑ucleus of ordinary nitrogen, IV14, in order to have
atomic number 7 and atomic weight 14, wo uld have to be composed of
1 4 protons and 7 electrons, and would therefore have to be a fermion, in
conflict wit h th e result of molecular spectroscopy52 that N 14 is a boson .
This problem (and others) were solved in 1932 with the discovery of the
neutron, 53 and by Heisenberg's subsequent suggestion14 that nuclei are
composed of protons and neutrons, not protons and electrons . It was
clear that a strong non-e lectromagnetic force of short range would have
to operate between neutrons and protons to ho ld nuclei together .
  After the success of the Fermi theory of beta decay, several authors54"
speculated that nuclear forces mi ght be explained in this theory as due
to the exchange of electrons and neutrinos . A few years later, in 1935,
