30                        1 Historical Introd uctio n

Hideki Yukawa proposed a quite different quantum field theory of the
nuclear force .55 In an essentially classical calculation, he found that the
interaction of a scalar field with nucleons (protons or neutrons) would
produce a nucleon-nucleon potential, with a dependence on the nucleon
separation r given by

                             Y(r ) x 1 exp(-~.r)             (1 .2.74 )

 instead of the 11r Coulomb potential produced by electric fields . The
 quantity ~ was introduced as a parameter in Yukawa's scalar field equation,
 and when this equation was quantized, Yukawa found that it described
 particles of mass U f c . The observed range of the strong interactions
 within nuclei led Yukawa to estimate that U /c is of the order of 200
electron masses . In 1 937 such `mesons' were discovered in cloud chamber
experiments" by Seth Neddermeyer and Anderson and by Jabez Curry
 Street and Edward Carl Stevenson, and it was generally believed that
 these were the hypothesized particles of Yukawa.
   The discovery of mesons reveated that the charged particles in cosmic
ray showers are not all electrons, and thus cleared up the problem with
these showers that had bothered Oppenheimer and Carlson . At the same
time, however, it created new difficulties . Lothar Nardheim56a pointed
out in 1939 that the same strong interactions by which the mesons are
copiously produced at high altitudes (and which are required in Yukawa's
theory) should have led to the mesons' absorption in the atmosphere, a
result contradicted b y their copious appearance at lower altitudes . In 1947
it was shown in an experiment by Marcello Conversi, Ettore Pancini, and
Oreste Piccioni57 that the mesons which predominate in cosmic rays at
low altitude actually interact weakly with nucleons, and therefore could
not be identified with Yukawa's particle . This puzzle was cleared up by
a theoretical suggestion,58 and its subsequent experimental confirmation 59
by Cesare Lattes, Occhialini, and Cecil Powell -there are two kinds
of mesons with slightly different masses : the heavier (now called the it
meson or pion) has strong interactians and plays the role in nuclear force
envisaged by Yukawa ; the lighter (now called the p meson, or muon) has
only weak and electromagnetic interactions, and predominates in cosmic
rays at sea level, being produced by the decay of rt mesons . In the same
year, 1947, entirely new kinds of particles (now known as K mesons and
hyperons) were found in cosmic rays by George Rochester and Clifford
Butler .60 From 1947 until the present particles have continued to be
discovered in a bewildering variety, but to pursue this story would take
us outside the bounds of our present survey . These discoveries showed
clearly that and conceptual framework which was limited to photons,
electrons, and positrons would be far too narrow to be taken seriously as
