        Quantum Field Theory II (8.324) Fall 2010
                     Assignment 2




Readings

  • Prof. Zwiebach’s notes on Lie algebras

  • Peskin & Schroeder chapters 15 and 16

  • Weinberg vol 2 chapter 15.

  • After ﬁnishing non-Abelian gauge theories we will go back to Peskin & Schroeder
    chapter 6 and Weinberg Vol I chapter 11.


Note:

  • In my lectures I will not discuss Batalin-Vilkovisky formalism. It is a beautiful
    formalism with many applications. It is particularly powerful in dealing with
    theories with complicated gauge symmetries for which ghosts for ghosts are
    needed. For example, this formalism played a crucial role in Prof. Zwiebach’s
    seminal work on constructing a complete covariant closed string ﬁeld theory.
    Those of you who would like to get a brief introduction about this formalism
    can read Weinberg’s Vol 2 Sec.15.8–15.9.



  Problem Set 2


  1. Group theory (14 points)

        (a) Peskin & Schroeder prob. 15.1 (c) and (d) only
        (b) Peskin & Schroeder prob. 15.2




                                            1
2. Transformation of the covariant current (12 points)
  Consider the usual Lagrangian
                             1 a µνa
                       L = − Fµν F    − iΨ̄(γ µ Dµ − m)Ψ                        (1)
                             4
  Here the unitary matrix group G has Lie algebra generators satisfying
                                   [Ta , Tb ] = ifabc Tc                        (2)
  with fabc totally antisymmetric. The matter ﬁeld Ψ transforms in some Lie-
  algebra representation deﬁned by matrices Tar . As we derived in lecture the
  equation of motion for the gauge ﬁeld can be written as
                                       Dµ F µν = J ν                            (3)
  with (in the expression below a-index is summed over)
                      F µν = F µνa Tar ,       J ν = g(Ψ̄γ ν Tar Ψ)Tar          (4)

   (a) Using the equations of motion prove that J µ is covariantly conserved.
   (b) Derive the transformation property of J ν under a gauge transformation.
       and use this to show that equation (3) is consistent under a gauge trans­
       formation (i.e. both sides transform the same). Note that for this problem
       you cannot use the transformation property of the LHS of (3) to deduce
       that for J µ as you are asked to checked the consistency of the equation.

3. θ term (12 points)
  One can in principle add the following term to a Yang-Mills Lagrangian
                                         θ µνλρ a a
                                Lθ =         ǫ Fµν Fλρ                          (5)
                                       64π 2
   (a) Discuss how this term transforms under C, P, T transformations.
   (b) Express it explicitly as a total derivative.

  Note: You will learn later (probably next term) that θ is in fact an angle with
  period 2π, i.e. with the particular normalization in (5), the theory is equivalent
  for θ + 2πn for any integer n.
4. Flat connections are locally trivial (24 points)
  Consider a non-Abelian gauge theory based on a unitary matrix group and as­
  sume we have a conﬁguration for the gauge ﬁeld Aµ such that the corresponding
  ﬁeld strength Fµν vanishes. Such gauge ﬁeld, or connection, is said to be a ﬂat
  connection. We want to show that such a ﬂat connection is gauge equivalent
  to zero locally; i.e., we can ﬁnd a well-deﬁned gauge parameter such that after
  a gauge transformation the gauge ﬁeld can be made to vanish on a connected
  region of spacetime. Show this in the following way:

                                           2
   (a) Write a diﬀerential equation for the group element U(x) that deﬁnes the
       gauge transformation that gauges away Aµ . Verify that the local integra­
       bility condition [∂µ , ∂ν ]U(x) = 0 is satisﬁed for the present problem.
   (b) Choose an origin x0 and take U(x0 ) = 1. Consider a path x(s) starting
       from x0 = x(s = 0). Write an ansatz for U(x(s)). To verify that U
       solves the diﬀerential equation requires consideration of more than one
       path. Explain why. Conclude that your ansatz solves the problem if the
       value of U at any point is independent of the path chosen.
   (c) Show that U(x), constructed by using paths, is in fact path independent
       (this is somewhat challenging!). Hints: Consider two nearby paths xµ (s)
       and x̃µ (s) = xµ (s) + δxµ (s), both of which start at x0 and end at x1 .
       Let U(x(s)) and Ũ (x̃(s)) denote the solutions along the paths and δU =
       Ũ (s) − U(s). Study the diﬀerential equation satisﬁed by U −1 δU. (This
       part derives a special case of the so-called non-Abelian Stokes theorem.
       Prof. Goldstone was one of the early people who derived it.)

5. Non-abelian gauge ﬁelds are not fully speciﬁed by Fµν (20 points)
  We learned that a connection Aµ whose ﬁeld strength Fµν vanishes is locally
  gauge equivalent to the zero connection. We now want to ask another ques­
  tion. Suppose two diﬀerent connections have the same ﬁeld strength, are the
  two connections gauge equivalent locally? In other words, is there a gauge
  transformation that maps one connection into the other (locally)?

   (a) Consider the question in the Abelian theory and conclude that in this case
       the gauge ﬁelds are gauge equivalent locally.
       For the non-abelian theory connections with the same ﬁeld strength need
       not be gauge equivalent locally. Therefore, it is suﬃcient to show an exam­
       ple where this is the case. Here is an example from Prof. Jackiw. Consider
       an SU(2) gauge theory and two connections. The ﬁrst one lives in the third
       direction of the Lie algebra, and the only nonvanishing components are
                                    1 σ3             1 σ3
                              Ax = − gy ,        Ay = gx                           (6)
                                    2 2              2   2
       where g is the gauge coupling constant and σ i , i = 1, 2, 3 are Pauli matrices.
       The second gauge ﬁeld will be of the form
                                       σ1            σ2
                                   Ax = ,       Ay =                               (7)
                                       2             2
       with all other components equal to zero.
   (b) Show by explicit computation that both connections lead to the same ﬁeld
       strength Fµν .

                                        3
   (c) It remains to show that the two connections given above are not gauge
       equivalent. Prove that this is the case by picking a suitable gauge covariant
       local object and showing that while it vanishes for one connection it does
       not vanish for the other (why is this suﬃcient ?)

6. Quantization of non-Abelian gauge theories (18 points)

   (a) Derive the propagator for the gauge ﬁeld in the axial gauge

                                           Aaz = 0 .                            (8)

   (b) Consider the generalized gauge Coulomb gauge, i.e. taking the gauge ﬁxing
                        ~ ~ a . Derive the ghost Lagrangian and ghost propagator.
       function as fa = ∇·A




                                       4
MIT OpenCourseWare
http://ocw.mit.edu




8.324 Relativistic Quantum Field Theory II
Fall 2010




For information about citing these materials or our Terms of Use, visit: http://ocw.mit.edu/terms.
