29     Beyond Perturbation Theory

29.4    Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories
We now turn to a question of great physical interest: in what gauge theories is supersym-
metry spontaneously broken?
     Let us start with an Abelian gauge theory, the supersymmetric version of quantum
electrodynamics described in Section 27.5. This is a U (1) gauge theory with two chiral
superfields Φ± carrying U (1) quantum numbers ±e, and superpotential f (Φ) = mΦ+ Φ− .
We saw in Section 27.5 that supersymmetry is broken in the tree approximation if we
include a Fayet–Iliopoulos term ξ[V ]D in the Lagrangian density, so the Witten index is
zero for ξ ̸= 0 and small e, and hence also for all values of e and ξ, including ξ = 0. Is
supersymmetry unbroken for ξ = 0? It is unbroken in the tree approximation, but how
can we tell if higher-order corrections or non-perturbative effects give the vacuum a finite
energy in this case?
     To answer this we shall use a symmetry principle of the theory for ξ = 0, in the way that
was described in general terms in Section 29.1. The symmetry here is charge conjugation:
the whole Lagrangian density is invariant under the charge conjugation transformation of
the chiral and gauge superfields:

                           CΦ± C −1 = Φ∓ ,        CV C −1 = −V .                      (29.4.1)

There is a massless fermion in the tree approximation, the photino, but if we take the
vacuum to be even under C then the one-photino state is odd under C, so these states are
not related to each other by multiplication with the supersymmetry generator. The chiral
fermion here has mass m in the tree approximation, so for small e it is not paired with
the vacuum either. With no fermionic state available to pair with, the vacuum state must
have strictly zero energy, at least for e small enough so that perturbation theory gives a
good qualitative picture of the spectrum. As we saw in Section 29.1, the zero energy of the
vacuum implies that supersymmetry is not broken. Likewise, the photino must be strictly
massless, since it has no bosonic state with which to pair.
     Now, what about values of e that are so large that perturbation theory cannot be
trusted at all? The Witten index itself is no help here, because it vanishes. Instead, let
us consider the weighted Witten index, Tr C(−1)F . We have seen that for small e and
ξ = 0 the vacuum has zero energy, and there are also two zero-energy states containing a
zero-momentum photino of spin up or down, and a bosonic zero-energy state containing
two zero-momentum photinos of opposite spin. The vacuum makes a contribution +1 to
Tr C(−1)F ; the two one-photino states make a contribution +2 (because both C and (−1)F
are −1); and the two-photino state makes a contribution +1, giving a weighted Witten
index Tr C(−1)F = 4. This is independent of the value of e, so even for strong couplings
the weighted Witten index is 4, and so supersymmetry is not broken.
     There is a complication here [2]. In counting zero-momentum states in the tree ap-
proximation, we have not considered the zero-momentum components of the gauge field
Vµ (x). A constant term in V0 (x) is no problem, because it can be removed by a gauge




                                              1
transformation
                                 Vµ (x) −→ Vµ (x) + ∂µ Λ(x) ,                           (29.4.2)
with gauge parameter Λ(x) proportional to x0 . On the other hand, we cannot simply remove
a constant term in Vi (x), because this would require a gauge transformation with Λ(x)
proportional to xi , which would conflict with the assumed periodicity of the fields under
translations by the box dimension L ≡ V 1/3 . In the particular model under consideration
here all fields have charges ±e or zero, so this periodicity is preserved if we limit ourselves
to a lattice of gauge transformations with
                                               2π X i
                                      Λ(x) =       ℓi x ,                               (29.4.3)
                                               eL
                                                    i

where ℓi are three positive or negative integers. Therefore although we cannot remove the
zero-momentum components of Vi (x) by a gauge transformation, we can freely shift them
by amounts 2πℓi /eL. The tree-approximation Lagrangian (not Lagrangian density) for
the xi -independent part of Vµ in a gauge with V0 = 0 is simply − 21 L3 i (∂0 Vi )2 , so the
                                                                              P

Hamiltonian is + 21 L−3 i (πi )2 , where πi is the canonical conjugate to Vi : πi = L3 ∂0 Vi .
                          P

The wave function Ψ(V ) for this field is then just like that of a free particle of unit mass in
three dimensions, in a box of linear dimensions 2π/eL with periodic boundary conditions.
The wave functions of definite energy are proportional to exp(ik · V), with energy k2 /2L3 ,
and ki = eLℓi , with ℓi integers. There is a unique zero-energy state of this field, with ki = 0
and with a normalized wave function equal to the constant (eL/2π)3/2 . Because this state
is unique, our counting of zero-energy states is unaffected by the gauge degree of freedom,
and the weighted Witten index is indeed 4.
     Now let us consider the theory of a simple non-Abelian gauge superfield, without chiral
superfields. Witten’s 1982 paper [2] on the Witten index presented an argument that for
such theories this index is r + 1 (or possibly −r − 1), where r is the rank of the gauge
group, the maximum number of commuting generators. In 1997 he found a correction to
this calculation [6], with the result that for the classical unitary, orthogonal, and symplectic
groups the index is a Casimir invariant C1 , which for the unitary and symplectic groups is
indeed equal to r + 1, but for the orthogonal groups O(N ) with N > 7 and the exceptional
groups takes a different value. In general, this Casimir invariant is defined by Eq. (17.5.33):
                                  X
                                      CACD CBCD = g 2 C1 δAB ,                           (29.4.4)
                                 CD

where g is a coupling constant, whose definition can be made unambiguous by specifying
that when the generators tA , tB , and tC are restricted to the ‘standard’ SU (2) subalgebra
that was used in the calculation of instanton effects in Section 23.5, the structure constant
is simply gϵABC . For the classical groups, we have
                                   
                                   N        SU (N )
                                   
                                   
                             C1 =    N − 2 SO(N ) for N > 3 .                           (29.4.5)
                                    
                                    
                                    N + 1 U Sp(2N )




                                                2
For SU (N ) the rank is r = N − 1, while for U Sp(2N ) it is r = N , so in both cases
r + 1 = C1 . But SO(N ) with N > 6 has rank r = (N − 1)/2 = (C1 + 1)/2 for N odd and
r = N/2 = (C1 + 2)/2 for N even, and the index is C1 , not r + 1. Of course, this does not
affect the main conclusion that, since the Witten index is not zero, supersymmetry is not
spontaneously broken. Kac and Smilga showed in 1999 that the index is also equal to C1
for exceptional groups [7]. We shall calculate the Witten index here only for SU (N ) and
U Sp(2N ) supersymmetric gauge theories with no chiral superfields, but in the course of
this calculation we will also see why the orthogonal and exceptional groups present special
difficulties.
     The general strategy of this calculation is the same as for the Abelian theories con-
sidered previously. We first examine the states of zero energy, to see if there are any that
cannot be paired by action of the supersymmetry generator. If there are, then as long as the
coupling is weak enough so that the tree approximation gives a good qualitative picture of
the spectrum, we know that these unpaired states really have precisely zero energy. We can
then find some non-zero weighted Witten index, which will be constant even for stronger
couplings, and conclude that supersymmetry is not broken for any coupling strength.
     There is another complication here, that did not enter in the earlier example of an
Abelian theory with charged chiral superfields. As usually formulated, general renormaliz-
able theories of gauge bosons and gauginos with no chiral superfields do not contain any
dimensionless parameters at all, so that there is no coupling parameter that can be adjusted
to make the couplings weak. Instead we have a running coupling constant, depending on
the ratio of the energy to a characteristic energy scale Λ, like the scale Λ ≈ 200 MeV for
quantum chromodynamics discussed in Section 18.7. For non-Abelian theories the gauge
coupling constant becomes strong at energies below Λ, however weak it may be at higher
energies. But here we are working in a box of volume L3 , which provides an infrared cut-off
at an energy ≈ 1/L, that is normally lacking in theories with unbroken gauge symmetries.
When we speak of a weakly coupled gauge theory, it should be understood that we mean
one with a coupling that is small down to energies of order 1/L. In this case, it is essential
to be able to argue that supersymmetry is broken for strong as well as weak couplings, in
order to be able to draw any conclusions at all about the realistic limit of infinite volume.
     We will work in temporal gauge, where VA0 = 0. The Lagrangian density (27.3.1) is
then
                1X 2         1X                 1X              1X 2
          L=−        fAij −        (∂0 VAi )2 −       λ̄A ( /
                                                           Dλ)A +       DA ,          (29.4.6)
                4            2                  2                 2
                 Aij           A                  A                       A

where, in temporal gauge,
                                                    X
                         fAij = ∂i VAj − ∂j VAi +        CABC VBi VCj ,               (29.4.7)
                                                    BC
                                                X
                            (Di λ)A = ∂i λA +          CABC VBi λC ,                  (29.4.8)
                                                  BC

                                      (D0 λ)A = ∂0 λA .                               (29.4.9)




                                              3
(As usual, the gauge coupling constant or constants are included as factors in the structure
constants CABC .) Without chiral superfields, there is no other dependence on the auxiliary
field DA ; since it enters quadratically, it may be put equal to the value at which the La-
grangian is stationary, DA = 0, and ignored from now on. Retaining only the x-independent
modes, the effective Lagrangian becomes
         Z                 "                                !2
                                 1X X                                1X
             d3 x L = L3       −      CABC VBi VCj               −      (∂0 VAi )2
                                 4                                   2
                                   Aij    BC                             Ai
                                                                         #                       (29.4.10)
                                 1 X                    1X
                               −     CABC λ̄A γi VBi λC −   λ̄A γ 0 ∂0 λA .
                                 2                        2
                                  ABCi                                   A

The Hamiltonian is then
                                                                               !2
                             1 X 2     L3 X X
                         H=     π Ai +        CABC VBi VCj
                            2L3        4
                                       Ai             Aij   BC
                                                                                                 (29.4.11)
                                      3
                                     L X                             
                                 +              CABC λ̄A γi VBi λC ,
                                     2
                                         ABCi

where πAi = L3 ∂0 VAi is the canonical conjugate to VAi .
     The gauge field configurations with zero energy in the tree approximation are those for
        P
which BC CABC VBi VCj = 0 for all A, i, and j. This condition is always satisfied if VBi
vanishes for all i except where tB is in a Cartan subalgebra of the gauge Lie algebra.1 For
the unitary and symplectic groups and their direct products this is the only way that it can
be satisfied. The same is true for the orthogonal gauge algebras O(N ) with N ≤ 6, which
are all equivalent to symplectic and/or unitary Lie algebras (see the Appendix to Chapter
15), but not for orthogonal gauge algebras O(N ) with N ≥ 7, which is why Witten’s original
calculation needed correction for this case.
     In the rest of this calculation we will only consider gauge algebras like the symplectic
and unitary algebras for which the condition of zero energy in the tree approximation does
require the VBi to vanish for all i except where tB is in a Cartan subalgebra of the gauge
Lie algebra. With all VAi = 0 except for the VAi for which tA is in the Cartan subalgebra,
the zero-energy modes of the fermion field are those also with λA = 0, except for the λA
for which tA is in the Cartan subalgebra.
     Now we must count these states. The eigenvalues of the tA in any representation
of a semi-simple Lie algebra are quantized, so by gauge transformations all values of the
non-zero gauge fields VAi are equivalent to values in a finite box with periodic boundary
conditions. The quantization of these modes is just like that carried out for the gauge field
   1
    A Cartan subalgebra is any subalgebra spanned by r-independent generators tA that commute with
one another, that is, for which CAAB vanishes for all tA when tA and tB are in the Cartan subalgebra,
where r is the rank, the maximum number of such generators. For instance, for the SU (3) symmetry of
strong interactions discussed in Section 19.7, the rank is r = 2, and the Cartan subalgebra can be taken to
consist of the third component of isospin t3 and the hypercharge t8 , which act on the light quarks with the
commuting matrices denoted λ3 and λ8 in Eq. (19.7.2).




                                                      4
in the U (1) model considered above, so the zero-energy state of these fields is again unique,
with a constant wave function in the box.
     The multiplicity of states with zero energy in the tree approximation comes entirely
from the fermion degrees of freedom. It is convenient to use a two-component notation,
in which instead of a four-component Majorana field λAα for each generator of the Cartan
subalgebra, we have two left-handed fields λALa with a = ±1/2, and their right-handed
Hermitian adjoints λ∗ALa . These gaugino fields satisfy the canonical anticommutation rela-
tions
                                   {λALa , λ∗BLb } = δAB δab
and
                                {λALa , λBLb } = {λ∗ALa , λ∗BLb } = 0 .
By operating on an arbitrary state vector with as many factors of λALa as necessary, we
can construct a state vector ∥0⟩ which is annihilated by all λALa . The general zero-energy
state vector is then a linear combination of products of the λ∗ALa acting on ∥0⟩.
     To see which of these states may be paired with each other by the action of the super-
symmetry generator, we must take account of a symmetry of the theory. The zero-energy
condition, that the gauge and gaugino fields lie only in directions corresponding to the
Cartan subalgebra, is invariant under the subgroup of the original gauge group consisting
of elements h that leaves this subalgebra invariant, that is, for which h−1 tA h is a linear
combination of the tB . These form a finite group, known as the Weyl group. For instance,
in the defining representation of SU (N ) the Weyl group consists of permutations of the N
coordinate axes, together with multiplication by a phase needed to make the transforma-
tions unimodular. These can be represented by products of the finite gauge transformations
W (i, j) = exp(iπσ(ij)/2) = iσ(ij) with i ̸= j that permute the ith and jth coordinate axes,
where σ(ij) is the U (N ) generator with [σ(ij)]i j = [σ(ij)]j i = 1, and with all other ele-
ments zero. These transformations induce orthogonal transformations in the space spanned
by the diagonal traceless Hermitian matrices tA that generate the Cartan subalgebra in the
adjoint representation. For instance, for the group SU (2) we can take the Cartan subalge-
bra to consist of just t3 , and the Weyl group then consists of the unit element and a single
non-trivial gauge transformation W (1, 2) = iσ(1, 2) = iσ1 , for which W −1 t3 W = −t3 . For
SU (3) the Cartan subalgebra has the two generators t3 and t8 , and the Weyl group con-
sists of the six gauge transformations 1, W (1, 2), W (2, 3), W (1, 3), W (1, 2)W (2, 3), and
W (2, 3)W (1, 2), which generate rotations by multiples of 60◦ in the space spanned by t3
and t8 .
     Assuming the vacuum to be invariant under the Weyl group, it can be paired by action
of the supersymmetry generators only with other states that are invariant under the Weyl
group.2 This may or may not include the previously constructed zero-energy state ∥0⟩.
The condition that the state ∥0⟩ be annihilated by all λALa is obviously invariant under the
Weyl group, so if it is unique this state must furnish a one-dimensional representation of
   2
     Witten remarked that physical states are necessarily Weyl-invariant, but we will not need to go into
this here, because the Weyl invariance of the vacuum and of the supersymmetry generators means that only
Weyl-invariant states are relevant to spontaneous supersymmetry breaking.




                                                   5
the Weyl group. The Weyl group always acts on the generators of the Cartan subalgebra by
orthogonal transformations, so there are two such representations: the invariant represen-
tation, in which each Weyl transformation is represented by unity, and the pseudoinvariant
representation, in which each Weyl transformation is represented by the determinant of its
action on the generators of the Cartan subalgebra.
     Let us first consider the case where ∥0⟩ is invariant under the Weyl group. Obviously
no linear combination of the one-fermion states λ∗ALa ∥0⟩ can be invariant under the Weyl
group. There is just one Weyl-invariant linear combination of the two-fermion states; it is
of the form U ∥0⟩, where                X
                                    U≡      eab λ∗ALa λ∗ALb .                     (29.4.12)
                                                    abA
(The spin indices a and b are contracted with the antisymmetric tensor eab defined by
Eq. (25.2.9), because the anticommutation relations make the product λ∗ALa λ∗ALb antisym-
metric in a and b.) There are various Weyl-invariant linear combinations of products of
three or more generators of the Cartan subalgebra, but the anticommutation of the λ∗ALa
makes all of them vanish3 except for powers of U . Also, in the product of more than r of
the U s some of the λ∗ALa would have to appear twice, so U r+1 = 0. We conclude then that
the Weyl-invariant states are limited to the r + 1 states

                                  ∥0⟩,     U ∥0⟩,     U 2 ∥0⟩,       ...,   U r ∥0⟩ .                      (29.4.13)

These are all bosonic states, and there are no fermionic states with zero energy in the
tree approximation with which they could be paired, so for sufficiently weak coupling these
states must have precisely zero energy, and supersymmetry is unbroken. Also, the Weyl-
invariant Witten index here is r + 1, and this is independent of the coupling strength, so
supersymmetry is not spontaneously broken whatever the strength of the gauge coupling.
   3
    To see this for SU (N ), note that each generator tA of its Cartan subalgebra may be written as a linear
                    P
combination tA =      i cAi Ti of generators Ti of the Cartan subalgebra of U (N ), with the only non-zero
element of each Ti being (Ti )i i = 1 (with indices not summed). In order for the tA to be traceless, we must
have i cAi = 0. Since the fields λ∗ALa transform under the Weyl group like the tA , it follows that for a
     P

function AB··· dAB··· λ∗ALa λ∗BLb · · · to be Weyl-invariant, the coefficients dAB··· must take the form
         P
                                                    X
                                           dAB··· =    cAi cBj · · · Dij··· ,
                                                     ij···

where the Dij··· are invariant tensors, in the sense that for any vectors ui , vj , etc., the function D(u, v, . . .) ≡
P
   ij··· Dij··· ui vj · · · is invariant under permutations of the coordinate axes. The most general such function
is a linear combination of products of the function
                                                                    X
                                                S(x, y, z, . . .) =   x i y i zi · · · ,
                                                                 i
                                                                                         P
with arguments x, y, z, . . . taken as various subsets of the u, v, etc. But because i cAi = 0, in our case
the sum of the components of each vector vanishes, so D(u) = S(u) = 0; D(u, v) is proportional to S(u, v);
D(u, v, w) is proportional to S(u, v, w); D(u, v, w, x) is a linear combination of S(u, v, w, x), S(u, v)S(w, x),
S(u, w)S(v, x), and S(u, x)S(v, w); and so on. The important point is that, even though the function
D(u, v, . . .) may not be symmetric in its arguments (because different products of Ss may appear with dif-
ferent coefficients), the functions S(u, v, . . .) are symmetric. In our case, the vectors are the anticommuting
quantities u(a)i = A λ∗ALa cAi , for which the only non-vanishing S function is S(u(1/2), u(−1/2)). With
                     P

a suitable normalization of the generators, this is the operator U .




                                                             6
     In the case where the state ∥0⟩ is pseudoinvariant, the only Weyl-invariant states are
of the form                     X
                                     ϵA,B,... λ∗ALa λ∗BLb · · · ∥0⟩ ,             (29.4.14)
                               A,B,...

where ϵA,B,... is the totally antisymmetric tensor of rank r. This is completely symmetric
among the a, b, . . ., so each state is characterized by the number of these indices that are
+1/2 rather than −1/2, a number that can take any value from 0 to r, so the number of
independent states is r + 1. Depending on whether r is even or odd, these states are either
all bosonic or all fermionic, so the Witten index here is ±(r + 1), and again supersymmetry
is not spontaneously broken.
     There is an interesting relation between the value of the Witten index obtained here
and ideas of how certain global symmetries become broken. The Lagrangian for a supersym-
metric gauge theory is invariant under the transformations of a global U (1) ‘R-symmetry,’
which change the left- and right-handed parts of the gaugino fields by opposite phases:

                         λAL −→ eiφ λAL ,           λAR −→ e−iφ λAR ,              (29.4.15)

with φ an arbitrary real constant phase. The conservation of the current J5µ associated
with this symmetry is violated by an anomaly
                                     1
                      ∂µ J5µ = −           CACD CBCD fAµν fBρσ ϵµνρσ ,
                                         X
                                       2
                                                                                   (29.4.16)
                                   32π
                                         ABCD

where as usual ϵµνρσ is the totally antisymmetric quantity with ϵ0123 ≡ 1. (This is obtained
from Eq. (22.2.24) by taking the gauge group generators tA as (tA )BC = −iCABC , because
the gauginos are in the adjoint representation of the gauge group, and by multiplying the
anomaly with a factor 1/2, because the gauginos do not have distinct antiparticles.) With
the definition of the gauge coupling specified above, Eq. (23.5.20) gives the integral of the
product of field strengths in the anomaly as
                                  Z      X µν ρσ
                            ϵµνρσ d4 x      fA fA = 64π 2 ν/g 2 ,                   (29.4.17)
                                           A

where the ‘winding number’ ν is an integer characterizing the topological class to which the
gauge field belongs. Putting together Eqs. (29.4.4), (29.4.16), and (29.4.17), we see that an
instanton of winding number ν induces a change in R ≡ d3 x J50 given by
                                                          R

                                     Z
                               ∆R = d4 x ∂µ J5µ = −2νC1 .                           (29.4.18)

                                              P                   C1
That is, the effective action contains terms    Aab λALa λALb eab     and its integer powers
that, instead of being invariant under the R-symmetry transformations (29.4.15), are trans-
formed by integer powers of the phase exp(2iφC1 ). Thus instantons invalidate invariance
under the general U (1) R-transformation (29.4.15), reducing it to the group Z2C1 of trans-
formations (29.4.15) with φ an integer multiple of π/C1 . We might expect that the growth
of the gauge coupling at low energy would lead (as in quantum chromodynamics) to the




                                                7
appearance of vacuum expectation values for gaugino bilinears, which would mean that the
discrete symmetry group Z2C1 is spontaneously broken to its Z2 subgroup, generated by a
simple sign change of the gaugino multiplet. Then there would be C1 zero-energy states
∥n⟩, given by acting on any one vacuum state ∥X⟩ with the elements exp(inπR/C1 ) of
Z2C1 , with n running only over the values 0, 1, . . . , C1 − 1 because we treat as equivalent
any pair of states that differ only by action of the generator exp(iπR) of Z2 . Since ∥X⟩ can
only be a linear combination of states with even values of R, we can form C1 states with
all values R = 0, 2, . . . , 2C1 − 2 of R by taking the linear combinations
                                                     
                                        X        inπR
                                           exp           ∥n⟩ .
                                        n
                                                  C1

In particular, for SU (N ) and U Sp(2N ) these states are the same as the Weyl-invariant
states encountered in the calculation of the Witten index in the case where the state ∥0⟩ is
R-invariant, and Weyl-invariant rather than pseudoinvariant. The operator U defined by
Eq. (29.4.12) has R = 2, so there are r + 1 = C1 states U n ∥0⟩ with R = 2n running from
zero to 2r = 2C1 − 2. More generally, the presence of C1 zero-energy states with the same
statistics helps to explain why the Witten index is equal to ±C1 for the exceptional and
orthogonal as well as the unitary and symplectic groups.
     The fact that the Witten index is non-vanishing for all pure gauge supersymmetric
theories means that to find examples of spontaneous supersymmetry breaking we must add
chiral superfields to the theory. It does not help to add massive chiral superfields to the
theory, since for weak coupling the introduction of massive fields does not change the menu
of zero-energy states. We have already seen an example of this: the work of Affleck, Dine,
and Seiberg reviewed in Section 29.3 showed that an SU (Nc ) gauge theory with Nf < Nc
left-chiral superfields Qai in the defining representation of SU (Nc ) and an equal number
of left-chiral superfields Q̄ai in the complex conjugate representation, with a mass term
P
   aij mij Q̄ai Qaj , has Nc zero-energy bosonic states and no zero-energy fermionic states.
(This is one case where the Witten index is not left unchanged when a mass term vanishes,
because this mass term is the term in the superpotential of highest order in the superfields,
so that a vanishing mass changes the behavior of the superpotential for large superfields.
In fact, Eq. (29.3.31) shows that as the masses go to zero the scalar field values in the state
of zero energy go to infinity.)
     On the other hand, there is no difficulty in finding theories with left-chiral superfields
subject to a symmetry that keeps them massless, in which supersymmetry is dynamically
broken. For instance, consider an SU (Nc ) gauge theory with Nf left-chiral superfields Qai
and Nf left-chiral superfields Q̄ai again in the Nc and N̄c representations of the gauge
group, but now also with Nf left-chiral superfields Li that are neutral under the gauge
group SU (Nc ). Assume a global (or weakly coupled local) SU (Nf ) symmetry, acting on
the ‘flavor’ i indices of the Qs and the Ls but not the Q̄s, which among other things forbids
a mass term linking the Qs and Q̄s. We take Qai and Li in the representations Nf and
N̄f of SU (Nf ), respectively, while the Q̄s are taken to be SU (Nf ) singlets. The only




                                              8
renormalizable superpotential is then of the form
                                             X
                              f (Q, Q̄, L) =    Gj Q̄aj Qai Li ,                          (29.4.19)
                                                 ija

where the Gj are a set of coupling constants, which by an SU (Nf ) rotation may be chosen
to have only one non-vanishing component, say the one with j = Nf , which can also be
chosen to be positive. (This is a generalization of a model treated by Affleck, Dine, and
Seiberg [8], in which they took Nc = 3 and Nf = 2.) The gauge-neutral superfields Li
have no effect on the non-perturbative terms in the effective superpotential, so we can use
the result of Section 29.3, that for Nc > Nf the gauge interactions yield a total effective
superpotential
                                       X
                   ftotal (Q, Q̄, L) =   Gj Q̄aj Qai Li
                                      ija
                                             "                        #−1/(Nc −Nf )       (29.4.20)
                                                       X
                                      + K Detij            Q̄aj Qai                   ,
                                                       a

with K a constant. In order for supersymmetry to be unbroken it is necessary (though not
sufficient) that the scalar components qaj , q̄aj , and ℓi of the chiral superfields satisfy the
condition ∂ftotal (q, q̄, ℓ)/∂ℓi = 0, so that, for all i,
                                          X
                                              Gj q̄aj qai = 0 .                        (29.4.21)
                                        ja
                                    P
But this tells us that the matrix a q̄aj qai has a zero eigenvalue, and therefore has zero
determinant, so this is a singular point of the superpotential (29.4.20), at which it is im-
possible for ∂ftotal /∂qai or ∂ftotal /∂ q̄aj to vanish. Supersymmetry is therefore necessarily
broken in this class of models.
      For instance, Affleck, Dine, and Seiberg [8] found the non-vanishing scalar components
qaj , q̄aj , and ℓi of the superfields Φai , Φ̄ai , Li at the minimum of the potential in their
model with Nc = 3 and Nf = 2 to be at the values

                                q11 = q̄11 = 1.286 (K/2G)1/7 ,
                                q22 = q̄22 = 1.249 (K/2G)1/7 ,                            (29.4.22)
                                             q
                                        ℓ1 = q112 − q2 ,
                                                      22

where the vacuum energy density is
                                                               1/7
                                ρVAC = 3.593 16G 10 /K4                .                  (29.4.23)

Also, K = 2Λ7 for θ = 0.
    The fact that supersymmetry is spontaneously broken in this case encourages us to
think that it will be broken by strong gauge forces in a wide range of asymptotically free
gauge theories, and thus lends legitimacy to the speculations about supersymmetry breaking
in Section 28.3.




                                                 9
