29.4 Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories 279
three generators of the ‘standard’ SU(2) subalgebra that was used in the
calculation of instanton effects in Section 23.5, the structure constant is
simply ge4gc. For the classical groups, we have

N SU(N)
Ci = N-—2 SO(N) forN>3 . (29.4.5)
N+1 USp(2N)

For SU(N) the rank is r = N —1, while for USp(2N) it is r = N, so in
both cases r+ 1 = C;. But SO(N) with N > 6 has rank r = (N — 1)/2 =
(C; +1)/2 for N odd and r = N/2 = (C; +2)/2 for N even, and the index
is C}, not r+ 1. Of course, this does not affect the main conclusion that,
since the Witten index is not zero, supersymmetry is not spontaneously
broken. Kac and Smilga showed in 1999 that the index is also equal to
C, for exceptional groups.’ We shall calculate the Witten index here only
for SU(N) and USp(2N) supersymmetric gauge theories with no chiral
superfields, but in the course of this calculation we will also see why the
orthogonal and exceptional groups present special difficulties.

The general strategy of this calculation is the same as for the Abelian
theories considered previously. We first examine the states of zero energy,
to see if there are any that cannot be paired by action of the supersymmetry
generator. If there are, then as long as the coupling is weak enough so that
the tree approximation gives a good qualitative picture of the spectrum,
we know that these unpaired states really have precisely zero energy.
We can then find some non-zero weighted Witten index, which will be
constant even for stronger couplings, and conclude that supersymmetry is
not broken for any coupling strength.

There is another complication here, that did not enter in the earlier
example of an Abelian theory with charged chiral superfields. As usually
formulated, general renormalizable theories of gauge bosons and gauginos
with no chiral superfields do not contain any dimensionless parameters at
all, so that there is no coupling parameter that can be adjusted to make the
couplings weak. Instead we have a running coupling constant, depending
on the ratio of the energy to a characteristic energy scale A, like the scale
A = 200 MeV for quantum chromodynamics discussed in Section 18.7.
For non-Abelian theories the gauge coupling constant becomes strong at
energies below A, however weak it may be at higher energies. But here
we are working in a box of volume L?, which provides an infrared cut-off
at an energy ~ 1/L, that is normally lacking in theories with unbroken
gauge symmetries. When we speak of a weakly coupled gauge theory,
it should be understood that we mean one with a coupling that is small
down to energies of order 1/L. In this case, it is essential to be able to
argue that supersymmetry is broken for strong as well as weak couplings,
