29.4 Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories 277

Let us start with an Abelian gauge theory, the supersymmetric version of
quantum electrodynamics described in Section 27.5. This is a U(1) gauge
theory with two chiral superfields ®4 carrying U(1) quantum numbers
+e, and superpotential f(®) = m®,@_. We saw in Section 27.5 that
supersymmetry is broken in the tree approximation if we include a Fayet-
Iliopoulos term €[V]p in the Lagrangian density, so the Witten index is
zero for € # 0 and small e, and hence also for all values of e and €,
including € = 0. Is supersymmetry unbroken for € = 0? It is unbroken in
the tree approximation, but how can we tell if higher-order corrections or
non-perturbative effects give the vacuum a finite energy in this case?

To answer this we shall use a symmetry principle of the theory for
€ =0, in the way that was described in general terms in Section 29.1. The
symmetry here is charge conjugation: the whole Lagrangian density is
invariant under the charge conjugation transformation of the chiral and
gauge superfields:

CO,C!=6;, cvc!=-y. (29.4.1)
There is a massless fermion in the tree approximation, the photino, but if
we take the vacuum to be even under C then the one-photino state is odd
under C, so these states are not related to each other by multiplication with
the supersymmetry generator. The chiral fermion here has mass m in the
tree approximation, so for small e it is not paired with the vacuum either.
With no fermionic state available to pair with, the vacuum state must
have strictly zero energy, at least for e small enough so that perturbation
theory gives a good qualitative picture of the spectrum. As we saw in
Section 29.1, the zero energy of the vacuum implies that supersymmetry
is not broken. Likewise, the photino must be strictly massless, since it has
no bosonic state with which to pair.

Now, what about values of e that are so large that perturbation theory
cannot be trusted at all? The Witten index itself is no help here, because
it vanishes. Instead, let us consider the weighted Witten index, Tr C(—1)?.
We have seen that for small e and € = 0 the vacuum has zero energy, and
there are also two zero-energy states containing a zero-momentum photino
of spin up or down, and a bosonic zero-energy state containing two zero-
momentum photinos of opposite spin. The vacuum makes a contribution
+1 to TrC(—1)*; the two one-photino states make a contribution +2
(because both C and (—1)F are —1); and the two-photino state makes a
contribution +1, giving a weighted Witten index TrC(—1)* = 4. This is
independent of the value of e, so even for strong couplings the weighted
Witten index is 4, and so supersymmetry is not broken.

There is a complication here.” In counting zero-momentum states in the
tree approximation, we have not considered the zero-momentum compo-
nents of the gauge field V,(x). A constant term in Vo(x) is no problem,
