29.5 The Seiberg-Witten Solution 287
where the vacuum energy density is
pvac = 3.593 (16G!9/44)1/7 | (29.4.23)
Also, # = 2A’ for 6 = 0.

The fact that supersymmetry is spontaneously broken in this case en-
courages us to think that it will be broken by strong gauge forces in a wide
range of asymptotically free gauge theories, and thus lends legitimacy to
the speculations about supersymmetry breaking in Section 28.3.

29.5 The Seiberg—Witten Solution’

It often happens that the tree-approximation potential in a supersymmetric
theory will take the value zero for a continuous range of scalar field values.
(For one example, see Eq. (29.1.9).) In this case the theory has a number
of scalar excitations with zero mass in the tree approximation, which
since supersymmetry is unbroken must be accompanied with suitable
fermionic superpartners. At low energies the theory will then be described
by a family of supersymmetric effective Lagrangians, whose members are
parameterized by one or more moduli, the scalar expectation values in the
underlying theory. Quantum effects in the underlying theory can modify
the dependence of the effective Lagrangian on these moduli, and even
alter the topology of the space of moduli.

In one of the most striking accomplishments of the 1990s in super-
symmetry theory, Seiberg and Witten!° were able to calculate the exact
dependence of the low-energy effective Lagrangian on a modular param-
eter in gauge theories with N = 2 supersymmetry. The ideas behind this
calculation can be made apparent by running through only the simplest
special case, that of an SU(2) gauge theory with N = 2 supersymmetry
and no additional matter hypermultiplets.

We saw in Section 27.9 that the Lagrangian density for this theory is
given after elimination of the auxiliary fields by

1 * 1 —
L= 2 - >= (Dud)4 (D" 6) — 5 > (wa (Dy)a)
A A
-2,J2Re Deane (Ai ewer) 62-3 DW fawf
ABC A
* This section lies somewhat out of the book’s main line of development and may be
omitted in a first reading.
