29.4 Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories 285
quantum chromodynamics) to the appearance of vacuum expectation val-
ues for gaugino bilinears, which would mean that the discrete symmetry
group Zc, is spontaneously broken to its Z2 subgroup, generated by a
simple sign change of the gaugino multiplet. Then there would be C;
zero-energy states |n), given by acting on any one vacuum state |X) with
the elements exp(intR/C,) of Z2c,, with n running only over the values
0, 1, ...,C; —1 because we treat as equivalent any pair of states that
differ only by action of the generator exp(izR) of Z2. Since |X) can only
be a linear combination of states with even values of R, we can form
C, states with all values # = 0, 2,...,2C, —2 of R by taking the linear
combinations

rex (=) in)

re
In particular, for SU(N) and USp(2N) these states are the same as the
Weyl-invariant states encountered in the calculation of the Witten index
in the case where the state |0) is R-invariant, and Weyl-invariant rather
than pseudoinvariant. The operator U defined by Eq. (29.4.12) has R = 2,
so there are r+ 1 = C, states U"|0) with R = 2n running from zero to
2r = 2C; — 2. More generally, the presence of C; zero-energy states with
the same statistics helps to explain why the Witten index is equal to +C;
for the exceptional and orthogonal as well as the unitary and symplectic
groups.

The fact that the Witten index is non-vanishing for all pure gauge
supersymmetric theories means that to find examples of spontaneous
supersymmetry breaking we must add chiral superfields to the theory.
It does not help to add massive chiral superfields to the theory, since
for weak coupling the introduction of massive fields does not change
the menu of zero-energy states. We have already seen an example of
this: the work of Affleck, Dine, and Seiberg reviewed in Section 29.3
showed that an SU(N,) gauge theory with Ny < N; left-chiral superfields
Qai in the defining representation of SU(N.) and an equal number of
left-chiral superfields Q,; in the complex conjugate representation, with
a mass term )0qjj mjjQiQaj, has N- zero-energy bosonic states and no
zero-energy fermionic states. (This is one case where the Witten index is
not left unchanged when a mass term vanishes, because this mass term
is the term in the superpotential of highest order in the superfields, so
that a vanishing mass changes the behavior of the superpotential for large
superfields. In fact, Eq. (29.3.31) shows that as the masses go to zero the
scalar field values in the state of zero energy go to infinity.)

On the other hand, there is no difficulty in finding theories with left-
chiral superfields subject to a symmetry that keeps them massless, in
which supersymmetry is dynamically broken. For instance, consider an
