282 29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

group. For instance, in the defining representation of SU(N) the Weyl
group consists of permutations of the N coordinate axes, together with
multiplication by a phase needed to make the transformations unimodular.
These can be represented by products of the finite gauge transformations
W(i, j) = exp(izo(ij)/2) = io(ij) with i # j that permute the ith and
jth coordinate axes, where o(ij) is the U(N) generator with [o(i Dj =
[o(ij))/; = 1, and with all other elements zero. These transformations
induce orthogonal transformations in the space spanned by the diagonal
traceless Hermitian matrices t,y that generate the Cartan subalgebra in
the adjoint representation. For instance, for the group SU(2) we can take
the Cartan subalgebra to consist of just t3, and the Weyl group then
consists of the unit element and a single non-trivial gauge transformation
W(1,2) = io(1,2) = io, for which W-'t3W = —t3. For SU(3) the
Cartan subalgebra has the two generators 43 and Ag, and the Weyl group
consists of the six gauge transformations 1, W(1,2), W(2,3), W(1,3),
W(1,2)W(2, 3), and W(2,3)W(1,2), which generate rotations by multiples
of 60° in the space spanned by f3 and tg.

Assuming the vacuum to be invariant under the Weyl group, it can
be paired by action of the supersymmetry generators only with other
states that are invariant under the Weyl group.** This may or may not
include the previously constructed zero-energy state |0). The condition
that the state |0) be annihilated by all Av is obviously invariant under
the Weyl group, so if it is unique this state must furnish a one-dimensional
representation of the Weyl group. The Weyl group always acts on the
generators of the Cartan subalgebra by orthogonal transformations, so
there are two such representations: the invariant representation, in which
each Weyl transformation is represented by unity, and the pseudoinvariant
representation, in which each Weyl transformation is represented by the
determinant of its action on the generators of the Cartan subalgebra.

Let us first consider the case where |0) is invariant under the Weyl group.
Obviously no linear combination of the one-fermion states 4%, , ,|0) can
be invariant under the Weyl group. There is just one Weyl-invariant linear
combination of the two-fermion states; it is of the form U|0), where

U=)_ ea dry tad io- (29.4.12)
ab
(The spin indices a and b are contracted with the antisymmetric tensor egp
defined by Eq. (25.2.9), because the anticommutation relations make the
“Witten remarked that physical states are necessarily Weyl-invariant, but we will
not need to go into this here, because the Weyl invariance of the vacuum and of
the supersymmetry generators means that only Weyl-invariant states are relevant to
spontaneous supersymmetry breaking.
