29.4 Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories 281
symplectic groups and their direct products this is the only way that it
can be satisfied. The same is true for the orthogonal gauge algebras O(N)
with N < 6, which are all equivalent to symplectic and/or unitary Lie
algebras (see the Appendix to Chapter 15), but not for orthogonal gauge
algebras O(N) with N > 7, which is why Witten’s original calculation
needed correction for this case.

In the rest of this calculation we will only consider gauge algebras like
the symplectic and unitary algebras for which the condition of zero energy
in the tree approximation does require the Vp; to vanish for all i except
where tg is in a Cartan subalgebra of the gauge Lie algebra. With all
V4i = 0 except for the V.y; for which ty is in the Cartan subalgebra, the
zero-energy modes of the fermion field are those also with 24 = 0, except
for the A.v for which t,y is in the Cartan subalgebra.

Now we must count these states. The eigenvalues of the ty in any
representation of a semi-simple Lie algebra are quantized, so by gauge
transformations all values of the non-zero gauge fields Vy; are equivalent
to values in a finite box with periodic boundary conditions. The quanti-
zation of these modes is just like that carried out for the gauge field in
the U(1) model considered above, so the zero-energy state of these fields
is again unique, with a constant wave function in the box.

The multiplicity of states with zero energy in the tree approximation
comes entirely from the fermion degrees of freedom. It is convenient
to use a two-component notation, in which instead of a four-component
Majorana field A,y, for each generator of the Cartan subalgebra, we
have two left-handed fields 1.474 with a = +1/2, and their right-handed
Hermitian adjoints 4°,,,. These gaugino fields satisfy the canonical
anticommutation relations

{Asta Agro} = b0abap
and
{Awa dav} = {yra> Xero} =0.
By operating on an arbitrary state vector with as many factors of Arq as
necessary, we can construct a state vector |0) which is annihilated by all
As¢La- The general zero-energy state vector is then a linear combination
of products of the 4*,, , acting on |0).

To see which of these states may be paired with each other by the action
of the supersymmetry generator, we must take account of a symmetry of
the theory. The zero-energy condition, that the gauge and gaugino fields
lie only in directions corresponding to the Cartan subalgebra, is invariant
under the subgroup of the original gauge group consisting of elements h
that leaves this subalgebra invariant, that is, for which h~!t,h is a linear
combination of the tg. These form a finite group, known as the Weyl
