===== PAGE 024 =====
Historical Introduction
Our immersion in the present state of physics makes it hard for us to
understand the difficulties of physicists even a few years ago, or to profit
from their experience. At the same time, a knowledge of our history is a
mixed blessing — it can stand in the way of the logical reconstruction of
physical theory that seems to be continually necessary,

I have tried in this book to present the quantum theory of fields in
a logical manner, emphasizing the deductive trail that ascends from the
physical principles of special relativity and quantum mechanics. This
approach necessarily draws me away from the order in which the subject
in fact developed. To take one example, it is historically correct that
quantum field theory grew in part out of a study of relativistic wave
equations, including the Maxwell, Klein-Gordon, and Dirac equations.
For this reason it is natural that courses and treatises on quantum field
theory introduce these wave equations early, and give them great weight.
Nevertheless, it has long seemed to me that a much better starting point is
Wigner’s definition of particles as representations of the inhomogeneous
Lorentz group, even though this work was not published until 1939 and
did not have a great impact for many years after. In this book we start
with particles and get to the wave equations later.

This is not to say that particles are necessarily more fundamental than
ficids. For many years after 1950 it was generally assumed that the
laws of nature take the form of a quantum theory of fields. I start
with particles in this book, not because they are more fundamental, but
because what we know about particles is more certain, more directly
derivable from the principles of quantum mechanics and relativity. If it
turned out that some physical system could not be described by a quantum
field theory, it would be a sensation; if it turned out that the system did
not obey the rules of quantum mechanics and relativity, it would be a
cataclysm.

In fact, lately there has been a reaction against looking at quantum
field theory as fundamental. The underlying theory might not be a theory
of fields or particles, but perhaps of something quite different, like strings.

1
===== PAGE 025 =====
2 ! Historical Introduction

From this point of view, quantum electrodynamics and the other quantum
held theories of which we are so proud are mere ‘effective field theories,
low-energy approximations to a more fundamental theory. The reason that
our field theories work so well is not that they are fundamental truths,
but that any relativistic quantum theory will look like a field theory when
applied to particles at sufficiently low energy. On this basis, if we want to
know why quantum field theories are the way they are, we have to start
with particles,

But we do not want to pay the price of altogether forgetting our past.
This chapter will therefore present the history of quantum field theory
from earliest times to 1949, when it finally assumed its modern form. In
the remainder of the book I will try to keep history from intruding on
physics.

One problem that I found in writing this chapter is that the history of
quantum field theory is from the beginning inextricably entangled with
the history of quantum mechanics itself. Thus, the reader who is familiar
with the history of quantum mechanics may find some material here that
he or she already knows, especially in the first section, where I discuss the
early attempts to put together quantum mechanics with special relativity.
In this case | can only suggest that the reader should skip on to the less
familiar parts.

On the other hand, readers who have no prior familiarity with quantum
field theory may find parts of this chapter too brief to be altogether clear.
F urge such readers not to worry. This chapter is not intended as a
self-contained introduction to quantum field theory, and is not needed as
a basis for the rest of the book. Some readers may even prefer to start
with the next chapter, and come back to the history later. However, for
many readers the history of quantum field theory should serve as a good
introduction to quantum field theory itself.

I should add that this chapter is not intended as an original work
of historical scholarship. I have based it on books and articles by real
historians, plus some historical reminiscences and original physics articles
that I have read. Most of these are listed in the bibliography given at the
end of this chapter, and in the list of references. The reader who wants
to go more deeply into historical matters is urged to consult these listed
works.

A word about notation. In order to keep some of the flavor of past
times, in this chapter I will show explicit factors of # and c (and even
h), but in order to facilitate comparison with modern physics literature,
T will use the more modern rationalized electrostatic units for charge, so
that the fine structure constant « ~ 1/137 is e?/4nhc. In subsequent
chapters I will mostly use the ‘natural’ system of units, simply setting
A=c=1.
