                                                                                               The Standard Model: Example Sheet 3

                                                                                               David Tong, February 2025


                                                                                               1. Show that there is no consistent chiral U (1) gauge theory with N = 4 Weyl fermions
                                                                                               with integer charges that can be coupled to gravity.




Copyright © 2023 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                                  Find an example of a consistent U (1) gauge theory with N = 5 Weyl fermions with
                                                                                               integer charges that can be coupled to gravity.

                                                                                               2*. An SU (N ) gauge theory is coupled to a single left-handed Weyl fermion χ in the
                                                                                               symmetric     representation and p left-handed Weyl fermions ψi , i = 1, . . . , p, in the
                                                                                               anti-fundamental  representation. For what value of p is the quantum theory consistent?
                                                                                                 Classically, the theory has a GF = SU (p) global symmetry that acts on the ψi . In
                                                                                               addition, there are two U (1) symmetries
                                                                                                                        U (1)χ :       χ → eiα χ and ψi → ψi
                                                                                                                        U (1)ψ :       χ → χ and ψi → eiβ ψi
                                                                                               Show that each of the U (1) symmetries suffers a chiral anomaly and so is not a symmetry
                                                                                               of the quantum theory. Find a linear combination of these symmetries that does survive
                                                                                               in the quantum theory.
                                                                                                 Compute the SU (p)3 , SU (p)2 U (1), U (1)3 and U (1) (i.e. mixed gauge-gravity) ’t Hooft
                                                                                               anomalies for the symmetries of the quantum theory.
                                                                                                 It is conjectured that this theory confines without spontaneously breaking any global
                                                                                               symmetry. The massless fields are thought to be a collection of gauge singlet fermions
                                                                                                                                   λij = ψ [i (χψ j] )
                                                                                               transforming in the anti-symmetric representation of the SU (p) global symmetry. What
                                                                                               is the U (1) charge of this fermion? Show that the ’t Hooft anomalies of the fermion λ
                                                                                               match those of the original gauge theory.
                                                                                                 Note: You may find the following data helpful. For SU (N ), the fundamental , adjoint,
                                                                                               symmetric      and anti-symmetric have the dimension, Dynkin index I(R) = I(R̄) and
                                                                                               anomaly coefficient A(R) = −A(R̄) given by
                                                                                                                      R            adj
                                                                                                                                              1             1
                                                                                                                    dim(R) N       N2 − 1     2
                                                                                                                                                N (N + 1)   2
                                                                                                                                                              N (N − 1)
                                                                                                                     I(R)  1        2N            N +2        N −2
                                                                                                                     A(R)  1         0            N +4        N −4

                                                                                                                                              1
                                                                                               3a. Consider SU (N ) Yang-Mills coupled to a single, massless left-handed Weyl fermion
                                                                                               λ in the adjoint representation. Why does this make sense as a quantum theory? (As an
                                                                                               aside: this theory happens to enjoy N = 1 supersymmetry, although this fact is not needed
                                                                                               for this question.)
                                                                                                  Classically this theory has a U (1) global symmetry which acts as λ → eiα λ. By consid-
                                                                                               ering how this transformation affects the θ angle, show that a Z2N subgroup survives in
                                                                                               the quantum theory.




Copyright © 2023 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                                 The theory is expected to confine, develop a mass gap, and form a condensate

                                                                                                                                       hTr λλi ∼ Λ3QCD .                                     (1)

                                                                                               How does the Z2N global symmetry act on this condensate? How many ground states does
                                                                                               the theory have?
                                                                                               b. Consider SU (N ) Yang-Mills (with N > 2) coupled to a single Dirac fermion ψ in the
                                                                                               symmetric    representation. What are the classical global symmetries? What are the
                                                                                               quantum global symmetries?
                                                                                               This theory is expected to confine, develop a mass gap, and form a condensate

                                                                                                                                        hψ̄ψi ∼ Λ3QCD

                                                                                               How many ground states does the theory have? How do your answers change if the Dirac
                                                                                               fermion is in the anti-symmetric representation of SU (N )?
                                                                                                 [Note: You may need to refer to the table in Question 3.]

                                                                                               4*. Consider one generation of the Standard Model, with left- and right-handed Weyl
                                                                                               fermions transforming in the following representations of U (1) × SU (2) × SU (3):

                                                                                                     QL : (2, 3)q ,   LL : (2, 1)l ,     uR : (1, 3)u ,    dR : (1, 3)d ,   eR : (1, 1)x .

                                                                                               This is the usual set of representations (ignoring the right-handed neutrino), but with the
                                                                                               hypercharges q, l, u, d, and x left arbitrary. Assume that all hypercharges are real numbers,
                                                                                               i.e. q, l, u, d, x ∈ R
                                                                                                 i) Write down all the conditions for anomaly cancellation, including the mixed U (1)-
                                                                                               gravitational anomaly.
                                                                                                 ii) Show that these equations have two solutions, one with u = −d and the other the
                                                                                               hypercharges of the Standard Model (up to scaling).



                                                                                                                                                 2
                                                                                               5. This is a repeat of question 4, but with the additional assumption that hypercharges
                                                                                               are integers, i.e. q, l, u, d, x ∈ Z.
                                                                                                 i) Write down all conditions for anomaly cancellation, this time omitting the requirement
                                                                                               that the theory can be coupled to gravity.
                                                                                                  ii) Show that there is a unique solution to these equations that automatically satis-
                                                                                               fies the mixed gauge-gravitational anomaly. (You may invoke, without proof, any pure




Copyright © 2023 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                               mathematics result that your grandmother has heard of.)
                                                                                               [Hint: First argue that you can write u − d = 2y for y ∈ Z. Then use the change of
                                                                                               variables
                                                                                                                               6                 3(v − w)
                                                                                                                       x=−            and y =             .]
                                                                                                                              v+w                 v+w

                                                                                               6. What are the global symmetries of the classical Lagrangian of the Standard Model
                                                                                               assuming:
                                                                                                 i) there are no right-handed neutrinos
                                                                                                 ii) right-handed neutrinos exist, with all possible relevant and marginal interactions
                                                                                               included?
                                                                                               How do these conclusions change if you include the effect of anomalies?




                                                                                                                                           3
