1 Statement of the Principle 69

time we may erect a locally inertial coordinate system in which matter satisties me
laws of special relativity. We saw in Chapter 1 that Gauss assume . na teen y
point on a curved surface we may erect a locally Cartesian coordina e 59 ;
which distances obey the law of Pythagoras. Because of this deep analogy, re
should expect the laws of gravitation to bear a strong resemblance to the formu as
of Riemannian geometry. In particular, Gauss’s assumption imaplies that all nner
properties of a curved. surface can be described in terms of derivatives 0f%/dx" o
the function &%(c) that defines the transformation « + é from some general
coordinate system 2" covering the surface to the locally Cartesian system é*,
whereas the Principle of Equivalence tells us that all effects of a gravitational field
can be described in terms of derivatives d¢*/0x" of the function €*(«) that defines
the transformation from the “laboratory” coordinates x" to the locally inertial
coordinates €%. Furthermore, it was shown in Chapter 1 that the geometrically
relevant functions of these derivatives are the quantities g,, defined by Eq. (1.1.7);
we shall see in the following sections of this chapter that the gravitational field is
described in just the same way.

Occasionally one finds references to a “weak Principle of Equivalence” and a
“strong Principle of Equivalence.” The strong Principle of Equivalence is just what
T have already stated, with “laws of nature” meaning all the laws of nature. The
weak principle is the same, but with “Jaws of nature”’ replaced by “Jaws of motion
of freely falling particles.” That is, the weak principle is nothing but a restatement
of the observed equality of gravitational and inertial mass, whereas the strong
principle is a generalization of these observations that governs the effects of
gravitation on all physical systems.

The experiments of Eétvdés, Dicke, and their predecessors (see Section 1.2)
provide direct verification only of the weak Principle of Equivalence, but they
provide some indirect evidence for the strong principle. The mass of different
substances arises in different proportions from the masses of the neutrons and
protons plus electrons of which they are composed, and from the strong and
electromagnetic forces that bind these particles together, so the ratio of gravita-
tional to inertial mass will be equal for all these substances only if it is equal for
their constituents. Wapstra and Nijgh! have shown that the limits set by Hétvés
on any possible inequality in the ratio of gravitational to inertial mass for glass,
cork, antimonite, and brass imply that this ratio is equal for neutrons and protons
plus electrons to 1 part in 6 x 105 and equal for neutrons and binding energies to
1 part in 1.2 x 10*. To this accuracy, an observer in a freely falling coordinate
system will detect no gravitational force on neutrons, hydrogen, or their binding
energies. It would be difficult to conceive of a theory that satisfies this requirement
and does not go all the way to the strong principle (that no gravitational effects of
any sort can be felt in a locally inertial frame).

. ts might, however, distinguish two versions of the strong principle of
he ‘i ence, @ very strong principle,” which applies to all phenomena, and a
tele Cota ee” which applies to all phenomena except gravitation

: ¥ the experiments of Eétvés and Dicke are not accurate enough to
