5 Time Dilation 81

itati otential of the earth is negligible in comparison, so ideally the
a a light fom the sun should be shifted to the red by 2.12 parts per
million as compared with light emitted by terrestrial atoms. vated

The difficulty in measuring the solar gravitational red shift can be appreciate
if we reflect that a motion of the source bya velocity valong the earth-sun direction
will produce an additional Doppler frequency shift Aviv = »v {recall Eq. (2.2.2)],
so the gravitational red shift can be masked by a velocity v = 2 x 10°", or in
e.g.s. units, v = 0.6 km/sec. It is not the rotation of the earth or the sun that
bothers us; these are known effects which can easily be taken into account. Thermal
effects are more serious; at a temperature of 3000°K the thermal velocity of typical
light elements (C, NV, 0) is about 2 km/sec, giving a Doppler broadening about
three times larger than the expected gravitational red shift. However, thermal
motions only broaden lines, not shift them, so they too can be lived with. The
really bothersome problems arise from unknown Doppler shifts owing to the
convection of gases in the solar atmosphere. In fact, the frequency shift is observed.
to vary from place to place on the solar disk, and is occasionally even toward the
blue! The convection tends to be vertical, so we can minimize the Doppler shifts it
produces by looking at the limb of the sun, where the motion is mostly at right
angles to the line of sight. Until recently the best result that could be achieved in
this way was that the solar gravitational red shift is of the order of 2 parts per
million.? In the last few years improved observational techniques? have yielded a
much better value of the red shift, equal to 1.05 + 0.05 times the predicted value.
However, it is too early to say that this result closes the story, at least until it can
be corroborated.

The red shifts are much larger for white dwarf stars like Sirius B and 40
Eridani B. Such stars have masses typically of the order of one solar mass, and.
radii of the order of 1/10 to 1/100 the sun’s radius, so the red shift of spectral lines
from their surface is about 10 to 100 times greater than for the sun, or roughly
1 part in 10* to 10°. Although this alleviates problems arising from convective
Doppler shifts or temperature or pressure, a new difficulty enters here: It is
difficult to determine the value of the gravitational potential @ with which to
compare the measured value of Av/v. If we know the mass of a white dwarf star,
we can deduce a rough value for its radius and surface gravitational potential from
astrophysical theory,* but the only white dwarf stars whose mass can be measured
are members of binary star pairs. For instance the mass of Sirius B is determined.
by calculating the total mass of Sirius A and B from their separation and period,
and then subtracting the mass of Sirius A calculated from stellar theory. However,
the scattering of light from Sirius A by the atmosphere of Sirius B makes the
yeas red shift on Sirius B very difficult to measure.'!? On the other hand,

mdani B is sufficiently far from 40 Eridani A so that scattering of light is no
problem, and the mass of 40 Eridani B can be determined separately from that

a A by locating their center of mass in addition to measuring their period and
paration. However, because 40 Eridani B and A are so far apart, their period of
revolution is very long,

and there has not yet been time to determine the mass of B
