7 Relativity and Anisotropy of Inertia 87

all the matter of the universe, far and near. However, once in an inerhia! frame, mw
laws of motion [such as Eq. (2.3.1)] are completely unaffected by the prese

i ‘tationally or in any other way. For instance, the mass
nearby masses, either gravitationally y j » fix our
of the sun determines the motion of the freely falling earth, but once w ,
coordinate frame to the earth we cannot detect the gravitational field of t e _
as shown with great accuracy by the experiment of Dicke. (See Section 1. :
Actually, the fact that the earth is not an infinitesimal neighborhood means the:
we can detect the sun’s field through tidal effects, as already discussed in Section
3.1.) The celestial bodies play a role here because the gravitational field equations
for uy need boundary conditions at infinity, and these are provided by the require-
ment that at great distances from the sun g,, merge with the cosmic gravitational
field produced by all the mass in the universe. We are not yet ready to go into the
details of the field equations and cosmology, but we can anticipate that the
gravitational field determined by the mass of the sun and these cosmic boundary
conditions is such that planetary orbits far from the sun do not precess with
respect to the typical stars, in agreement with observation. (See Section 15.1.)

These points are so important that they are worth repeating. In the absence of
nearby matter, the inertial frames are determined by the mean cosmic gravitational
field, which is in turn determined by the mean mass density of the stars, so it is not
surprising that their inertial frames are at rest, or in a state of uniform non-
rotating motion, with respect to the typical stars. When a large mass like the sun is
brought close, it changes the inertial frames so that they accelerate toward the
mass, but the Jaws of motion in these freely falling frames are still those of special
relativity, and show no effects of the surrounding mass distribution. In this sense,
the equivalence principle and Mach’s principle are in direct opposition.

The issue between Mach and Einstein can be drawn by asking whether in fact
the presence of large nearby masses does affect the laws of motion, other than by
determining the inertial frames? Cocconi and Salpeter pointed out!® that there is
a large mass near us, the Milky Way galaxy, and that Mach’s principle would
suggest slight differences in inertial mass when a particle is accelerated toward or
away from the galactic center. This was checked experimentally by Hughes,
Robinson, and Beltran-Lopez,** and in a similar experiment, by Drever.!? (See
Figure 3.1.) Hughes et al. observed the resonant absorption of photons by a Li?
nucleus in a 4700 Gauss magnetic field. The ground state has spin 3/2, so it splits
im a magnetic field into four energy levels, which should be equally spaced. if the
laws of nuclear physics are rotationally invariant. In this case the three transitions
among neighboring states should have the same energy and the photon absorption
coefficient should show a single sharp peak at this energy. However, if inertia were
anisotropic then the four magnetic substates would not be exactly equally spaced
fener vould be not one but three closely spaced resonance lines. Hughes et al.

at no such splitting greater than the line width of 53 x 1077! MeV

occurred over a 12-hr period, during whi 1
; g which the rotation of the earth carri
magnetic field from 22° toward the galactic center to 104° velactn

old fr away from the galactic
center. If we think of the Li? nucleus as a single proton w .

ith angular momentum
