•   II




                                     »       I




                   - www.combridge.org/9780521b6000
    more information
In thisthirdvolume of The Quantum Theory of Fields,Nobel Laureate Steven
Weinberg continueshismasterlyexpositionof quantum fieldtheory.This volume
presentsa self-contained, up-to-date,and comprehensive introductionto super-
          a
symmetry, highly    activearea of theoreticalphysicsthat is likelyto be at the
centerof futureprogressin the physicsof elementaryparticles    and gravitation.
The textintroducesand explainsa broad range of topics,includingsupersymmet-
ricalgebras,supersymmetricfieldtheories, extended supersymmetry,supergraphs,
non-perturbativer       theories
                  esults,       of supersymmetry in higherdimensions,and su-
          A
pergravity. thorough   reviewis given of the phenomenological implicationsof
supersymmetry,including   theoriesof both gauge- and gravitationally  mediated
supersymmetry breaking.  Also provided isan introductionto mathematical
       based on holomorphy and duality,thathave proved so fruitful
techniques,                                                            in recent
developments. This  book  containsmuch  materialnot  found  in other  books  on
supersymmetry,includingpreviouslyunpublished           Problems
                                                results.          are included.

                          From reviewsof Volume I
   an impressivelylucidand thorough presentationof the subject...
'...                                                                Weinberg
manages to present difficulttopicswith richnessof meaning and marvellous
       Fullof valuableinsights,
clarity.                                   issure to become a classic,
                                his treatise                            doing
for quantum fieldtheory what Dirac's Quantum Mechanics did for quantum
mechanics.I eagerlyawait the publicationof the second volume.'
                                                       S. S. Schweber, Nature
'Forover twenty years therehas been no good modern textbook on the subject.
For allthattime,Steven Weinberg has been promising to writeone.That he has
      done itiscause forcelebrationamong those who try to teach and try to
finally
learnthe subject.
                Weinberg'sbook isforseriousstudentsof fieldtheory...itisthe
firstextbookto treatquantum fieldtheorythe way itisused by physiciststoday.'
                                                    Howard Georgi,Science
'StevenWeinberg, who contributedto the development of quantum chromo-
dynamics and shared the Nobel Prizein Physics for his contributionsto the
electroweaktheory,has writtena definitive  texton the physicalfoundationsof
quantum  fieldtheory.His book  differs           from the long lineof previous
                                       ignificantly
books on quantum fieldtheory...To summarize, Foundationsbuildsthe structure
of quantum fieldtheory on the sure footingof physicalinsight.Itis beautifully
produced and meticulouslyedited... and itisa realbargain in price.Ifyou want
to learn quantum fieldtheory,or have already learneditand want to have a
definitivereferenceat hand, purchase thisbook.'
                                              O. W. Greenberg,PhysicsToday
'In addition to a superb treatment of all the conventional topics there are
numerous sectionscoveringareasthatare not normally emphasized, such as the
subjectof fieldredefinitions,
                            higher-ranktensor fieldsand an unusually clear
and thorough treatmentof infraredeffects...thislatestbook reinforceshis high
scholarlystandards.It providesa unique expositionthat willprove invaluable
both tonew researchstudentsas wellas to experiencedresearchworkers.Together
with Volume II,thiswillbecome a classic
                                      texton a subjectof centralimportance
to a wide area of theoretical
                            physics.'
                                               M. B. Green, CERN Courier
'Ibelievethat what readerswillfind particularly  helpfulin thisvolume is the
consistencyof thewhole approach,and the emphasis on quantities and properties
that are directlyusefulto particlephysicists.
                                            This is particularly
                                                               true for those
who are interested in the more phenomenological aspects.The reader only needs
limitedbackground knowledge, and a clearlineisfollowedthroughout the book,
making iteasy to follow.The author presentsextremelythorough but elementary
discusssionsof importantphysicalquestions,some of which seem to be an original
way of addressingthe subject.'
                                                 J.Zinn-Justin,Physics World
                    book by one of the masters of the subject...
This isa well-written                                          itiscertainly
destinedto become a standard textbook and should finditsway to the shelves
of everyphysicslibrary.'
                                   J.Madore, Classicaland Quantum Gravity
The book startsout with an excellenthistorical
                                             introduction,not found anywhere
else,givingcitations
                   to many by now classicpapers...a valuablereferencework
as wellas a textbook for graduate students.'
                                     G. Roepstorff,Zentralblatt
                                                              fur Mathematik

                         From reviewsof Volume II

'Itis a majesticexposition.The two volumes are structuredin a logicalway.
Everythingisexplainedwith incisive clarity.Weinberg always goes to the heart
of any argument, and includesmany things that cannot be found elsewhere
in the literature.
                 Often I find myself thinking: "Ah! Now I understand that
            I findithard to imagine a bettertreatmentof quantum fieldtheory
properly."...
than Weinberg's. All seriousstudentsand researcherswillwant to have these
volumes on theirshelves.'
                                                      John C. Taylor,Nature

'Weinberg'sModern Applicationsgoes to the boundaries of our present
         of fieldtheory. It isunmatched by any other book on quantum field
understanding
theory foritsdepth,generalityand definitive
                                          character,and itwillbe an essential
referenceforseriousstudentsand researchersin elementaryparticlephysics.'
                                             O. W. Greenberg,PhysicsToday

   Steven Weinberg isone of our most giftedmakers of theoretical
'...                                                           toolsas wellas
a virtuosointheiruse.His new book conveys both thesatisfaction of
                                   forthe "modern applications"
    natureand the feelof the atelier,
understanding                                                   of itssubtitle
includeboth thederivationof physicalconsequencesand the development of new
toolsfor understandingand applying fieldtheory itself...Modern Applicationsis
a splendidbook, with abundant usefulreferencesto the original iterature.Itisa
               read from cover to cover,forthe wholeness Weinberg'spersonal
very interesting
perspectivegivesto quantum fieldtheory and particlephysics.'
                                                        Chris Quigg, Science

'Experiencedresearchersand beginning graduate studentswill delightin the
gems of wisdom to be found in these pages. This book combines exposition
of technicaldetailwith physicalinsightin a unique manner that confirms the
promise of Volume I and I have no doubt that thesetwo volumes willrapidly
         the classictreatmentof thisimportant subject.'
constitute
                                                M. B. Green, CERN Courier

\..a valued referenceand a mine of usefulinformationfor professionalfield
theorists.'
                                                Tom Kibble,New Scientist
'...
   a clearpresentationof the subject, explainingthe underlyingconceptsin much
depth  and in an accessible  style. expect that thesevolumes willbecome the
                                   I
firstsourcewe turn to when tryingto answer the challengingquestionsasked by
brightpostgraduateswhen they first   encounter quantum fieldtheory...I have no
doubt that The Quantum Theory of Fieldswillsoon be found on the bookshelves
of most particletheorists, and thatitwillbe one of the main sourcesused in the
preparation of lectureso n the subjectfor postgraduatestudents.'
                    C. T C. Sachrajda,The Times Higher EducationSupplement
'...
   Weinberg has produced a masterpiecethatwillbe a standardreferenceon the
fieldfora long time to come.'
                                                B. E. Y. Svensson,Elementa

                         From reviewsof Volume HI
\..has produced a treatise that many of us had long awaited,perhaps without
             it...
fullyrealizing   w ith the publicationof The Quantum Theory of Fields,
                                                                     Vol.HI,
has performed an analogous servicefor supersymmetry...Although thisvolume
isthethirdina trilogy,itisquitedifferent from itstwo predecessors,
                                                                 and itstands
on itsown... May a new generationof studentsimbibe itscontentand spirit.'
                                                               PhysicsToday
The thirdvolume of The Quantum Theoryof Fieldsisa self-contained
                                                               introduction
to the world of supersymmetry and supergravity.It willbe usefulboth for
experiencedresearchersin the fieldand for studentswho want to take the first
stepstowards learningabout supersymmetry. Unlike other books in thisfield,it
coversthe wide spectrum of possibleapplicationsof supersymmetry in physics.'
                                                    Hans PeterNilles,Nature

'Weinberg isof course one of the creatorsof modern quantum fieldtheory,as
wellas of itsphysicalculmination,the standard model of all(nongravitational)
interactions.
            Itis...very timelythat thislatestpart of his monograph, devoted
to supersymmetry and supergravity, has just appeared. As a text,ithas been
pretestedby Weinberg for a freestandingone-year graduate course; as a clear
organizing referenceto this extremely vast field,it will help the experts as
well...Weinberg's styleof presentationis as clear and meticulous as in his
previousworks.'
                    StanleyDeser,Journalof General Relativity and Gravitation

'Weinberg triesto be as elementary and clearas possibleand steersclearof
more sophisticatedmathematical tools.Together with the previousvolumes, this
volume willserveas an invaluablereferenceto researchersand a textbook for
graduate students.'
                                          G. Roepstorff,ZentralblattMATH
The   Quantum            Theory            of   Fields




                     Volume   HI
                   Supersymmetry
                  Steven Weinberg
                        of TexasatAustin
                University




                 CAMBRIDGE
                 UNIVERSITY        PRESS
CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITYPRESS
        New York,
Cambridge,               Madrid,
                 Melbourne,                    SaoPaulo,
                               CapeTown,Singapore,
    MexicoCity
Delhi,
Cambridge       Press
        University
TheEdinburgh
           Building,      CB2 8RU,UK
                  Cambridge,
       intheUnited
Published            ofAmerica
                 States      byCambridge           New York
                                               Press,
                                        University
www.cambridge.org
Information  title:
        onthis  www.cambridge.org/9780521670555
© S.Weinberg  2005
          2000,
Thispublication
             isincopyright.   tostatutory
                        Subject        exception
andtotheprovisions       collective
                 ofrelevant            agreements,
                                licensing
noreproduction
            ofanypartmay take   without
                            place
thewritten        ofCambridge
         permission                 Press.
                            University
First      2000
    published
        edition
Paperback            2005
              published
8thprinting
         2012
Printed
     andboundbyMPG BooksGroup,
                             UK
A catalogue
         record
             forthis       isavailable
                   publication     fromtheBritish
                                               Library
ISBN978-0-521-67055-5
                 Paperback




Cambridge
        University    hasnoresponsibility
                  Press               forthepersistence
                                                    oraccuracyofURLs forexternal
orthird-party
          internet      referred
                 websites     tointhis         anddoesnotguarantee
                                     publication,                 that
                                                                     anycontent
onsuchwebsites orwill
             is,           accurate
                     remain,     orappropriate.
                                              Information
                                                       regarding     travel
                                                                prices,
timetables
        andotherfactual
                      information  inthis
                               given     workarecorrect
                                                      atthetimeoffirst    but
                                                                    printing
Cambridge             doesnotguarantee
                  Press
         University                 theaccuracyofsuchinformation
                                                               thereafter.
                               Contents




Sectionsmarked with an asteriskare somewhat out of the book's main lineof
development and may be omitted in a firstreading.

PREFACE      TO VOLUME    HI                                          xvi


NOTATION                                                              xx


24    HISTORICAL      INTRODUCTION                                      1

24.1 UnconventionalSymmetries and 'No-Go' Theorems                   1
SU(6) symmetry □ Elementary no-go theorem for unconventionalsemi-simple
compact Lie algebrasD Role of relativity
24.2 The Birthof Supersymmetry                                       4
                    D
Bosonic stringtheory Fermionic coordinatesD Worldsheet supersymmetry D
Wess-Zumino model □ Precursors

Appendix A     517(6)Symmetry of Non-Relativistic
                                               Quark Models            8

Appendix B    The Coleman-Mandula Theorem                              12

Problems                                                              22

References                                                            22

25    SUPERSYMMETRY         ALGEBRAS                                  25

25.1 Graded Lie Algebras and Graded Parameters                       25
                                D                     □
Fermionic and bosonic generators Super-Jacobiidentity Grassmann
       D Structureconstantsfrom supergroup multiplication
parameters                                              rulesD Complex
conjugates
25.2 Supersymmetry Algebras                                            29
                                  □
Haag-Lopuszanski-Sohnius theorem Lorentztransformationof fermionic
       D Centralcharges D Other bosonic symmetries □ /^-symmetry □ Simple
generators

                                     vn
viii                             Contents

and extended supersymmetry D Four-component notation □ Superconformal
algebra
25.3 Space InversionPropertiesof Supersymmetry Generators              40
Parityphases in simple supersymmetry  □  Fermions have imaginary parity D
Paritymatricesin extended supersymmetry D Dirac notation
25.4   Massless ParticleSupermultiplets                                43
Known particlesaremasslessforunbroken supersymmetry D Helicityraisingand
loweringoperators□ Simple supersymmetry doublets □ Squarks,sleptons,and
gauginos □ GravitinoD Extended supersymmetry multiplets□ Chiralityproblem
forextended supersymmetry

25.5 Massive ParticleSupermultiplets                                   48
Raising and loweringoperatorsfor spin 3-component □ General massive
     for simple supersymmetry □ Collapsed supermultiplet□ Mass bounds in
multiplets
extended supersymmetry □ BPS statesand short supermultiplets

Problems                                                               53
References                                                             54

26     SUPERSYMMETRIC        FIELD   THEORIES                          55

26.1 DirectConstructionof FieldSupermultiplets                       55
Constructionof simplestN = 1 fieldmultiplet□ Auxiliaryfield□
    supersymmetry transformationrulesD Four-component notation □ Wess-
Infinitesimal
Zumino supermultiplets
                     regained
26.2   General Superfields                                             59
Superspace spinor coordinates□ Supersymmetry generatorsas superspace
         operators□ Supersymmetry transformationsin superspace D General
differential
superfields□ MultiplicationrulesD Supersymmetric differential
                                                            operatorsin
         □
superspaceSupersymmetric  actionsfor                  D
                                     generalsuperfields Parityof component
fieldsD Counting fermionicand bosonic components

26.3 Chiraland Linear Superfields                                       68
                                        □ Left-and right-chiral
Chiralityconditionson a generalsuperfield                     superfieldsD
Coordinatesx^ □ Differentialconstraints□ Product rules□ Supersymmetric &-
terms D ^"-terms equivalentto Z)-termsD Superpotentials□ Kahler potentials
D Partialintegrationin superspace D Space inversionof chiralsuperfieldsD
jR-symmetryagain □ Linear superfields
26.4 RenormalizableTheoriesof ChiralSuperfields                        75
Counting powers □ Kinematic Lagrangian □ ,^-term of the superpotentialD
                                            fields□ On-shellsuperalgebra□
Complete Lagrangian D Eliminationof auxiliary
Vacuum solutions□ Masses and couplingsD Wess-Zumino Lagrangian regained
                                    Contents                          IX

26.5 SpontaneousSupersymmetry Breaking in the Tree Approximation   83
O'Raifeartaighmechanism □                       □               □
                          R-symmetry constraints Flatdirections Gold-
stino
26.6 SuperspaceIntegrals, FieldEquations,and the Current Superfield    86
Berezin integrationD D- and ^"-terms as superspaceintegrals□ Potentialsu-
perfields□ Superspace fieldequations D Conserved currentsas components of
                D Conservationconditionsin superspace
linearsuperfields
26.7 The Supercurrent                                                90
Supersymmetry current □ Superspace transformationsgeneratedby the super-
symmetry current D Local supersymmetry transformationsD Constructionof
the supercurrent□ Conservationof the supercurrentD Energy-momentum
    and R-current□ Scaleinvarianceand R conservation□ Non-uniqueness of
tensor
supercurrent
26.8   General Kahler Potentials*                                     102
Non-renormalizable non-derivativeactions □ ZMerm of Kahler potential□
Kahler metric □ Lagrangian density□ Non-linearcr-modelsfrom spontaneous
internalsymmetry breaking D Kahler manifolds □ Complexifiedcosetspaces

Appendix     Majorana Spinors                                        107
Problems                                                             111
References                                                           112

27     SUPERSYMMETRIC           GAUGE   THEORIES                     113

27.1 Gauge-InvariantActionsfor ChiralSuperfields                     113
Gauge transformationof chiralsuperfields□ Gauge superfieldV D Extended
gauge invariance□ Wess-Zumino gauge □ Supersymmetric gauge-invariant
      terms forchiralsuperfields
kinematic
27.2   Gauge-InvariantActionfor Abelian Gauge Superfields             122
Fieldstrengthsupermultiplet□ Kinematic Lagrangian densityforAbelian gauge
supermultiplet Fayet-Iliopoulosterms □ Abelian field-strength
              □                                              spinorsuper-
fieldWa □ Left-and right-chiral
                              partsof Wa □ Wa as a superspacederivativeof
V □ Gauge invarianceof Wa □ 'Bianchi'identitiesin superspace
27.3 Gauge-InvariantAction for General Gauge Superfields              127
Kinematic Lagrangian density for non-Abelian gauge supermultiplet□ Non-
                    spinor superfieldWAoL □ Left-and right-chiral
Abelian field-strength                                           parts of
WAa D 0-term D Complex couplingparameter t
27.4 RenormalizableGauge Theorieswith ChiralSuperfields              132
Supersymmetric Lagrangian density□ Eliminationof auxiliary     □
                                                          fields
     forunbroken supersymmetry D Counting independent conditionsand field
Conditions
X                               Contents

variables□ Unitaritygauge □ Masses for spins0, 1/2,and 1 □ Supersymmetry
current□ Non-Abelian gauge theorieswith generalKahler potentials□ Gaugino
mass

27.5 Supersymmetry Breaking in the Tree Approximation Resumed         144
Supersymmetry breakingin supersymmetricquantum electrodynamicsD General
case:masses for spins0, 1/2,and 1 □ Mass sum rule□ Goldstino component of
gaugino and chiralfermion fields
27.6   PerturbativeNon-RenormalizationTheorems                        148
Non-renormalizationof Wilsonian superpotential□ One-loop renormalization
of terms quadratic in gauge superfieldsD Proof using holomorphy and new
                                  □ Non-renormalizationof Fayet-Iliopoulos
symmetries with externalsuperfields
constants£a d For €a = 0> supersymmetry breaking depends only on super-
potentialD Non-renormalizabletheories
27.7   Soft Supersymmetry Breaking*                                   155
Limitationon supersymmetry-breakingradiativecorrections□ Quadratic
      in tadpolegraphs
divergences
27.8  Another Approach: Gauge-InvariantSupersymmetry Transformations 157
De Wit-Freedman transformationrules□ PreservingWess-Zumino gauge with
combined supersymmetry and extended gauge transformations

27.9 Gauge Theorieswith Extended Supersymmetry*                       160
AT = 2 supersymmetry from N = 1 supersymmetry and R-symmetry □ La-
grangian for N = 2 supersymmetricgauge theory □ Eliminatingauxiliaryfields
□ Supersymmetry currentsD Witten-Olivecalculationof centralcharge □ Non-
renormalizationof masses □ BPS monopoles D Adding hypermultipletsD N = 4
supersymmetry D Calculationof beta function D N = 4 theory is finiteD
Montonen-Olive duality

Problems                                                              175

References                                                            176

28     SUPERSYMMETRIC       VERSIONS   OF THE STANDARD       MODEL    179

28.1 Superfields, Anomalies, and ConservationLaws                      180
Quark, lepton,and gauge superfields D At leasttwo scalardoublet superfields
D ^"-term Yukawa couplings □ Constraintsfrom anomalies D Unsuppressed
violationof baryon and lepton numbers D /^-symmetry D R parity□ /x-termD
Hierarchy problem □ Sparticlemasses □ Cosmological constraintson lightest
superparticle
28.2 Supersymmetry and Strong-Electro weak Unification                 188
Renormalizationgroup equationsfor running gauge couplingsD Effectof super-
                                Contents                               XI

symmetry on beta functions□ Calculationof weak mixing angle and unification
mass D Justtwo scalardoublet superfields
                                       □ Coupling at unificationscale

28.3 Where is Supersymmetry Broken?                                    192
Tree approximationsupersymmetry breakdown ruledout □ Hierarchy from non-
perturbativeeffectsof asymptoticallyfree gauge couplings □ Gauge and
         mediation of supersymmetry breaking D Estimatesof supersymmetry-
gravitational
breaking scale□ Gravitinomass □ Cosmological constraints
28.4 The Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model                        198
Supersymmetry breakingby superrenormalizable  terms □ General Lagrangian D
Flavor changing processesD Calculationof K° <->K D Degenerate squarks and
sleptons□ CP violationD Calculationof quark chromoelectricdipole moment
D 'Naivedimensionalanalysis' D Neutron electricdipolemoment □ Constraints
on masses and/or phases

28.5 The Sectorof Zero Baryon and Lepton Number                       209
D-term contributionto scalarpotentialD /j-termcontributionto scalar
    □ Soft supersymmetry breaking terms □ Vacuum stability
potential                                                    constrainton
parameters D Finding a minimum of potentialDB/i^OD      Masses of CP-odd
neutralscalars□ Masses of CP-even neutralscalars□ Masses of charged scalars
D Bounds on masses □ Radiative corrections□ Conditions for electroweak
symmetry breaking □ Charginos and neutralinosD Lower bound on \/i\
28.6  Gauge Mediation of Supersymmetry Breaking                      220
                    □ Supersymmetry breaking in gauge supermultiplet
Messenger superfields
        □ Gaugino masses □ Squark and sleptonmasses □ Derivationfrom
propagators
holomorphy □ Radiative corrections□ Numerical examples D Higgs scalar
masses D \iproblem D Ai} and Qj parameters □ Gravitinoas lightestsparticle
□ Next-to-lightest
                 sparticle
28.7 Baryon and Lepton Non-Conservation                              235
Dimensionalityfiveinteractions□ Gaugino exchange □ Gluino exchange
        □
suppressedWino  and  bino exchange effectsD Estimate of proton lifetime□
Favored modes of proton decay

Problems                                                              240

References                                                            241

29     BEYOND   PERTURBATION       THEORY                             248

29.1 General Aspects of Supersymmetry Breaking                       248
Finitevolume □ Vacuum energy and supersymmetry breaking □ Partially
                                                                  broken
extended supersymmetry?  D Pairingof bosonic and fermionicstates□ Pairing
of vacuum and one-goldstinostate□ Witten index D Supersymmetry unbroken
Xll                              Contents

in the Wess-Zumino model D Models with unbroken supersymmetry and zero
Witten index D Large fieldvalues□ Weighted Witten indices

29.2 Supersymmetry Current Sum Rules                                 256
Sum rule for vacuum energy density □ One-goldstino contributionD The
supersymmetry-breakingparameter F D Soft goldstinoamplitudes □ Sum rule
for supersymmetry current-fermionspectralfunctions□ One-goldstino
     D Vacuum energy densityin terms of !F and D vacuum values D Vacuum
contribution
energy sum ruleforinfinite
                         volume

29.3   Non-PerturbativeCorrectionsto the Superpotential                266
Non-perturbativeeffectsbreak externalfieldtranslationand R-conservation□
Remaining symmetry □ Example: generalizedsupersymmetricquantum chromo-
dynamics D Structureof induced superpotentialfor C\ > C2 Q Stabilizingthe
vacuum with a bare superpotential□ Vacuum moduli in generalized
      quantum chromodynamics for Nc> Nf □ Induced superpotential
supersymmetric                                                    islinear
in bare superpotentialparameters for C\ = C2 Q One-loop renormalizationof
[WzWz],? term forallCu C2
29A   Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories                        276
Witten index vanishesin supersymmetricquantum electrodynamics□ C-weighted
Witten index D Supersymmetry unbroken in supersymmetric quantum
         □ Counting zero-energygauge fieldstatesin supersymmetricquantum
electrodynamics
electrodynamics□ CalculatingWitten index for general supersymmetric pure
gauge theories□ Counting zero-energygauge fieldstatesfor general
       pure gauge theoriesD Weyl invariance□ Supersymmetry unbroken in
supersymmetric
generalsupersymmetricpure gauge theories□ Witten index and R anomalies □
Adding chiralscalars□ Model with spontaneouslybroken supersymmetry
29.5 The Seiberg-WittenSolution*                                       287
Underlying N = 2 supersymmetric Lagrangian □ Vacuum modulus D Leading
                                       Lagrangian □ EffectiveLagrangian for
non-renormalizableterms in the effective
component  fieldsD  Kahler         and
                           potential   gauge couplingfrom a functionh(Q>)□
SU(2) R-symmetry Prepotential DualitytransformationD h(Q>)translation
                   □             □                                       D
Zg ^-symmetry  □   SL(2,Z)-symmetry  □              □
                                       Centralcharge Charge and magnetic
monopole moments □ Perturbativebehavior for large \a\ D Monodromy at
infinity□ Singularities from dyons D Monodromy at singularities □ Seiberg-
               □
Witten solution Uniqueness proof

Problems                                                               305

References                                                             305

30     SUPERGRAPHS                                                     307

30.1   PotentialSuperfields                                            308
                                Contents                              Xlll

Problem of chiralconstraints□ Corresponding problem in quantum
         □ Path integrals
electrodynamics         over potentialsuperfields

30.2 Superpropagators                                                310
A troublesomeinvarianceD Change of variables□ Definingproperty of super-
propagatorD Analogy with quantum electrodynamicsD Propagator forpotential
          D Propagator forchiralsuperfields
superfields
30.3 Calculationswith Supergraphs                                     313
Superspace quantum effectiveaction □ Localityin fermioniccoordinatesD D-
                             actionD Counting superspacederivatives
terms and ^"-termsin effective                                     D No
renormalizationof ^"-terms

Problems                                                              316

References                                                            316

31    SUPERGRAVITY                                                    318

31.1 The Metric Superfield                                            319
Vierbeinformalism D Transformationof gravitational fieldD Transformationof
              □
gravitinofield Generalizedtransformationof metricsuperfieldH^ □ Interaction
of Hp with supercurrent□ Invarianceof interaction
                                                D Generalizedtransformation
of Hp components D AuxiliaryfieldsD Counting components D Interactionof
H^ component fields□ Normalizationof action
                     Action
31.2 The Gravitational                                                326
EinsteinsuperfieldE^ D Component fieldsof E^ D Lagrangian forH^ □ Value of
k □ Total Lagrangian D Vacuum energy density□ Minimum vacuum energy D
De Sitterand anti-deSitterspaces□ Why vacuum energy isnegative□ Stability
of flatspace □ Weyl transformation

31.3 The Gravitino                                                    333
            conditionson gravitinofieldD Gravitino propagator D Gravitino
Irreducibility
kinematicLagrangian D Gravitinofieldequation D Gravitinomass from broken
supersymmetry □ Gravitinomass from s and p
31.4 Anomaly-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking                         337
First-order
          interaction                                X D General formula
                    with scalenon-invariancesuperfield
forX □ General first-orderinteractionD Gaugino masses □ Gluino mass D B
parameter D Wino and bino masses □ A parameters
31.5 Local Supersymmetry Transformations                              341
Wess-Zumino gauge for metric superfield□ Local supersymmetry
     □ Invarianceof action
transformations
XIV                              Contents

31.6  Supergravityto All Orders                                        343
Local supersymmetry transformationof vierbein,gravitino,and auxiliaryfields
D Extended spin connection D Local supersymmetry transformationof general
scalar supermultiplet□ Product rulesfor general superfieldsD Real matter
superfields□ Chiralmatter superfields□ Product rulesfor chiralsuperfields
                                                                        D
Cosmological constantand gravitinomass D Lagrangian for supergravityand
chiralfieldswith generalKahler potentialand superpotentialD Eliminationof
auxiliaryfields□ Kahler metric □ Weyl transformationD Scalarfieldpotential
D Conditions for flatspace and unbroken supersymmetry D Complete bosonic
Lagrangian □ Canonical normalization□ Combining superpotential  and Kahler
potential□ No-scalemodels
31.7  Gravity-MediatedSupersymmetry Breaking                           355
Early theorieswith hidden sectors□ Hidden sectorgauge coupling strong at
energy A D Firstversion: Observable and hidden sectors□ Separable bare
superpotentialD General potentialD Terms of order k4A8 « mAg D A estimated
as « 10n GeV D \i-and B/x-termsD Squark and sleptonmasses □ Gaugino
masses □ A-parameters □ Second version: Observable,hidden, and modular
sectors□ Dynamically induced superpotentialformodular superfieldsD Effective
superpotentialof observablesector D  /j-term□  Potentialof observablesector
scalarsD Terms of order k8A12 « m* □ Soft supersymmetry-breakingterms □ A
estimatedas « 1013GeV D Shiftsin modular fields□ Absence of Qj terms D
Squark and sleptonmasses D Gaugino masses
Appendix     The VierbeinFormalism                                      375
Problems                                                                378
References                                                              379

32     SUPERSYMMETRY        ALGEBRAS    IN HIGHER     DIMENSIONS        382

32.1   General Supersymmetry Algebras                                    382
Classificationof fermionicgenerators□ Definitionof weight D Fermionic
        in
generators fundamental  spinor representation□ Fermionic generatorscommute
        □
with Pp General form of anticommutation relations   □ Centralcharges □ Anti-
commutation relations  f or odd dimensionality□ Anticommutation relationsfor
                    □
even dimensionality R-symmetry groups
32.2   Massless Multisets                                             393
Littlegroup 0(d — 2) D Definitionof 'spin'j □ Exclusionof j > 2 D Missing
fermionicgenerators□ Number of fermionicgenerators< 32 □ N = 1
      ford = 11 D Three-form masslessparticle□ Types IIA, IIB and heterotic
supersymmetry
supersymmetry ford = 10
32.3 p-Branes                                                        397
New conservedtensors□ Fermionic generatorsstill
                                              in fundamental spinorrepre-
                                  Contents                          xv

sentation□ Fermionic generatorsstill
                                   commute with P^ D Symmetry conditions
on tensorcentralcharges D 2-form and 5-form centralcharges ford = 11

Appendix     Spinorsin Higher Dimensions                           401
Problems                                                           407
References                                                         407

AUTHOR     INDEX                                                   411

SUBJECT    INDEX                                                   416
                Preface       To    Volume        III




This volume    deals with quantum field theories that are governed by
supersymmetry, a symmetry that unites particlesof integerand half-integer
spin in common    symmetry multiplets.These theoriesoffera possible way
of solving the 'hierarchyproblem,' the mystery of the enormous ratio of
the Planck mass to the 300 GeV energy scale of electroweak symmetry
breaking. Supersymmetry also has the qualityof uniqueness that we search
for in fundamental physical theories.There is an infinitenumber of Lie
groups that can be used to combine particlesof the same spin in ordinary
symmetry multiplets,but there are only eight kinds of supersymmetry
in four spacetime dimensions, of which only one, the simplest,could be
directlyrelevant to observed particles.
  These are reasons enough to devote thisthird volume of The Quantum
Theory of Fieldsto supersymmetry. In addition,the quantum fieldtheories
based on supersymmetry have remarkable properties that are not found
among other fieldtheories:some supersymmetric theorieshave couplings
that are not renormalized in any order of perturbation theory; other
theoriesare finite;and some even allow exact solutions.Indeed, much of
the most interestingwork in quantum fieldtheory over the past decade
has been in the context of supersymmetry.
  Unfortunately, after a quarter century there is no direct evidence for
supersymmetry, as no pair of particlesrelated by a supersymmetry
           has yet been discovered. There is just one significantpiece
transformation
of indirectevidence for supersymmetry: the high-energy unificationof
the 517(3),517(2), and 17(1)gauge couplings works better with the extra
particlescalledfor by supersymmetry than without them.
  Nevertheless, because of the intrinsicattractivenessof supersymmetry
and the possibilityit offers of resolving the hierarchy problem, I and
many other physicistsare reasonably confident that supersymmetry willbe
found to be relevant to the real world, and perhaps soon. Supersymmetry
is a primary target of experiments at high energy planned at existing
accelerators,and at the Large Hadron Collider under construction at the
CERN    laboratory.

                                   xvi
                                Preface                              xvn

  After a historicalintroduction in Chapter 24, Chapters 25-27 present
the essentialmachinery of supersymmetric fieldtheories:the structureof
the supersymmetry algebra and supersymmetry multiplets and the
           of supersymmetric Lagrangians in general, and in particular
construction
for theories of chiral and gauge superfields.Chapter 28 then uses this
machinery to incorporate supersymmetry in the standard model of elec-
troweak and strong interactions,and reviews experimental difficulties and
opportunities. Chapters 29-32 deal with topics that are mathematically
more advanced: non-perturbative results,supergraphs, supergravity,and
supersymmetry in higher dimensions.
  I have made the treatment of supersymmetry here as clear and self-
contained as I could. Wherever possible I take the reader through
            rather than just reporting resultsfrom the literature.Where
calculations,
calculationsare too lengthy or complicated to be included in a book of
thissort,especiallyin Chapter 28,1 have triedto present simpler versions
that give the reader an idea of the physical issuesinvolved.
  I have made a point of including topicshere that have generallynot been
covered in earlierbooks, some because they are too new. These include:
the use of holomorphy to study perturbative and non-perturbative
radiative
      corrections;the calculationof central charges; gauge-mediated and
anomaly-mediated supersymmetry breaking; the Witten index; duality;
the Seiberg-Witten calculationof the effectiveLagrangian in N = 2
supersymmetricgauge theories;supersymmetry breaking by modular fields;
and a firstlook at the rapidlydeveloping topic of supersymmetry in higher
dimensions, including theorieswith p-branes.
  On the other hand, I have shortened the usual treatment of two topics
that seemed to me to have been well covered in earlierbooks. One of these
isthe use of supergraphs. Many of the previous applicationsof the super-
graph formalism in studying the general structureof radiativecorrections
can now be handled more easilyby using the arguments of holomorphy
described in Sections 27.6 and 29.3.The other is supergravity.In Sections
31.1-31.5 I have given a detailed and self-containedtreatment of super-
gravity in the weak-field limit,which makes itclear why the ingredientsof
supergravity theories— the graviton,gravitino,and auxiliaryfields— are
what they are, and which allows us to derive some of the most important
resultsof supergravity theory, including the formula for the gravitino
mass and for the gaugino masses produced by anomaly-mediated super-
symmetry breaking. In Section 31.6 I have outlined the calculationsthat
generalizesupergravity theory to gravitationalfieldsof arbitrarystrength,
but these calculationsare so lengthy and unlovely that I was content to
quote other sources for the results.However, in Section 31.7 I have given
a fullerthan usual treatment of gravitationallymediated supersymmetry
breaking. I regretthat I have not been able to include excitingwork of the
XV111                            Preface

past decade on supersymmetry related to stringtheory, but stringtheory
is beyond the scope of this book, and I did not want to report resultsfor
which I had not provided a basis of explanation.
  I have given citationsboth to the classicpapers on supersymmetry
and to useful references on topics that are mentioned but not presented
in detailin this book. I did not always know who was responsible for
material presented here, and the mere absence of a citationshould not
be taken as a claim that the material presented here is original,but
some of it is. I hope that I have improved on the original literature
or standard textbook treatments in several places, as for instance in
the proof of the Coleman-Mandula     theorem; in the treatment of parity
matrices in extended supersymmetry theories;in the inclusionof new soft
supersymmetry-breaking terms in the minimum supersymmetric standard
model; in the derivation of supercurrent sum rules; and in the proof of
the uniqueness of the Seiberg-Witten solution.
  I have also supplied problems for each chapter. Some of these problems
aim simply at providing exercisein the use of techniques described in the
chapter; others are intended to suggest extensions of the resultsof the
chapter to a wider classof theories.
  In teaching a course on supersymmetry, I have found that this book
provides enough material for a one-year course for graduate students. I
intended that thisbook should be accessibleto students who are familiar
with quantum field theory at the level it is presented in the firsttwo
volumes of this treatise. It is not assumed that the reader has gone
through Volumes I and II, but for the convenience of those fortunate
readers who have done so I use the same notation here, and give cross-
referencesto material in Volumes I and II wherever appropriate.

                                 * * *

  I must acknowledge my special intellectualdebt to colleagues at the
University of Texas, notably Luis Boya, Phil Candelas, Bryce and CecileDe
Witt, Willy Fischler,Daniel Freed, Joaquim Gomis, Vadim Kaplunovsky,
and especiallyJacques Distler.Also, Sally Dawson, Michael Dine, Michael
Duff, Lawrence Hall, Hitoshi Murayama, Joe Polchinski,Edward Witten,
and Bruno Zumino gave valuable help with special topics. Jonathan
Evans read through the manuscript of this volume, and made many
valuable suggestions. For pointing out various errors in the firstprinting
of thisbook, I am greatly indebted to Stephen Adler, Jose Espinora, Tony
Gherghetta, and San Fu Tuan. For corrections to the firstprinting of
thisvolume I am indebted to several colleagues,especiallyStephen Adler.
Thanks are due to Alyce Wilson, who prepared the illustrations,   to Terry
                                Preface                               xix

Riley for finding countless books and articles, and to Jan Duffy for many
helps. I am  gratefulto Maureen   Storey of Cambridge University Press for
working   to ready thisbook   for publication, and especiallyto my editor,
Rufus Neal, for his continued friendlygood advice.




                                                 STEVEN    WEINBERG
Austin, Texas
May, 1999
                           Notation




The big issuein choosing notation for a book on supersymmetry iswhether
to use a two-component or a four-component notation for spinors. The
standard textson supersymmetry have opted for the two-component Weyl
notation.I have chosen instead to use the four-component Dirac notation
except in the firststages of constructing the supersymmetry algebra and
multiplets,because I think thiswillmake the book more accessibleto those
physicistswho work on particlephenomenology and model building. It
would be a pity to see the growth of a separate enclave of supersymmetry
           who communicate well with each other but are cut off by their
specialists,
notation from the largercommunity of particletheorists.
  There is no great difficultyanyway in converting expressions in four-
component form into the two-component formalism. In the representation
of the Dirac matrices used throughout this book, in which 75 is the
diagonal matrix with elements +1, +1, —1, and —1 on the main diagonal,
any four-component Majorana spinor xpa (such as the supersymmetry
generator Qa, the superspace coordinate 0a, or the superderivative S>a)
may be written in terms of a two-component spinor Xa as



where e is the 2 x 2 antisymmetric matrix with en = +1. The two-
component spinor Xa is what in other books is often called \p*a= ipa ,
while (ex*)a would be called xpa. A summary of useful properties of
four-component Majorana spinors is given in the appendix to Chapter 26.
  Here are some other featuresof the notation used in thisbook:

Latin indices i, j, k, and so on generally run over the three spatial
coordinate labels,usually taken as 1, 2, 3. Where specificallyindicated,
they run over values 1,2, 3, 4, with x4 = it.

Greek indices /x,v, etc.from the middle of the Greek alphabet generally
run over the four spacetime coordinate labels 1, 2, 3, 0, with x° the
time coordinate. Where it is necessary to distinguish between spacetime

                                  xx
                                Notation                              xxi

coordinates in a general coordinate system and in a locallyinertialsystem,
indices/x,v, etc.are used for the former and a, b, etc.for the latter.

Greek indices a, /?,etc.from the beginning of the Greek alphabet
    (except in Chapter 24) run over the components of four-component
generally
spinors. To avoid confusion, I depart here from the conventions of
Volume
     II, and use upper-case lettersA, B, etc.to label the generators of
a symmetry algebra. Components of two-component spinors are labelled
with indices a, b, etc.In particular,four-component supersymmetry
       are denoted Qa, while two-component generators (the bottom two
generators
components of Qa) are called Qa.

Repeated indicesare generally summed,   unless otherwise indicated.

The spacetime metric r\^vis diagonal, with elements r\\\= r\22= f/33=
1, foo = -1.

The d'Alembertian is defined as □ = r\^d2/dx^dxv = V2 - d2/dt2, where
V2 isthe Laplacian d2/dxidxi.

The 'Levi-Civita tensor' e^vpa is defined as the totally antisymmetric
quantity with 60123= +1.

Dirac matrices y^ are defined so that y^yv + 7v7^ = 2^v. Also, ys =
WJW)^,    and p = iy° = 74. Where explicitmatrices are needed, they are
given by the block matrices
                         0 1                       0   a
               y° = -i   1 0            y = -i    -a   0
where 1 is the unit 2x2 matrix, 0 is the 2 x 2 matrix with elements zero,
and the components of a are the usual Pauli matrices

        ai =            ' ai =           ' ff3=                  •
                ( i o )        ( °t ~o )        ( o        -l)
We also frequently make use of the 4 x 4 block matrices
                         1 0                     e 0
                 75 =                      €=
                         0 -1                    0 e
where e isagain the antisymmetric 2x2 matrix i<T2-
                                                 For instance,our phase
convention for four-component Majorana spinors s may be expressed as
S* = — P 75 € 5.

The step function 6(s) has the value +1 for s > 0 and 0 for s < 0.

The complex conjugate, transpose, and Hermitian adjoint of a matrix
or vector A are denoted A*, AT, and A* = A*T, respectively. We use
XX11                            Notation

an asterisk * for the Hermitian adjoint of an operator or the complex
conjugate of a number, except where a dagger | isused for the transpose of
the matrix formed from the Hermitian adjoints of operators or complex
conjugates of numbers. +H.c. or +c.c. at the end of an expression
indicatesthe addition of the Hermitian adjoint or complex conjugate of
the foregoing terms. A bar on a four-component spinor u is defined by
u = rfp.

Units are used with h and the speed of lighttaken to be unity.Throughout
—e is the rationalized charge of the electron,so that the fine structure
constant isa = e2/4n ~ 1/137. Temperatures are in energy units,with the
Boltzmann constant taken equal to unity.

Numbers   in parenthesis at the end of quoted numerical data give the
uncertainty in the last digitsof the quoted figure. Where not otherwise
indicated,experimental data are taken from 'Review of ParticlePhysics,'
The ParticleData Group, European Physics Journal C 3, 1 (1998).
                                  24


                Historical         Introduction




The history of supersymmetry is as peculiar as anything in the history of
science.Suggested in the early 1970s, supersymmetry has been elaborated
sincethen into a beautifulmathematical formalism that unites particlesof
differentspin into symmetry multipletsand has profound implications for
fundamental physics.Yet there isso far not a shred of directexperimental
evidence and only a few bitsof indirectevidence that supersymmetry has
anything to do with the real world. If (as I expect) supersymmetry does
turn out to be relevant to nature, it will represent a striking success of
purely theoreticalinsight.
  Chapter 25 will begin the construction of supersymmetry theoriesfrom
firstprinciples.In the present chapter we shallintroduce supersymmetry
along chronological rather than logicallines.


     24.1   Unconventional   Symmetries    and 4No-Go'    Theorems

In the early 1960s the symmetry 517(3) of Gell-Mann and Ne'eman
(discussed in Section 19.7) successfullyexplained the relationsbetween
various strongly interactingparticlesof differentcharge and strangeness
but of the same spin.The idea then grew up that perhaps 517(3) is part of
a larger symmetry, which has the unconventional effectof uniting 517(3)
multipletsof differentspin.1There issuch an approximate symmetry in the
non-relativistic
               quark model, under 517(6) transformations on quark spins
and flavors,analogous to an earlier517(4) symmetry of nuclear physics
that had been introduced in 1937 by Wigner.2 As described in detailin
Appendix A of thischapter, this51/(6) symmetry unites the pseudoscalar
meson octet n, K, K, and r\,the vector meson octet p, K*, K*, and co,and
the vector meson singlet$ in a single 35 multiplet,and also unites the
spin 1/2 baryon octet N, Z, A, and S with the spin 3/2 baryon decuplet
A, 1(1385), E(1530), and Q in a single56 multiplet.The 517(6) symmetry
scored a number of successes,but itis actuallynothing but a consequence
of the approximate spin and flavor independence of forces in the quark

                                       1
2                       24 HistoricalIntroduction

model; the 517(6) symmetry is somewhat weaker than the assumption of
spin and flavor independence, but, as shown in Appendix A, there is no
evidence that the predictions of 517(6) symmetry are any more accurate
than those of complete spin and flavor independence.
   Nevertheless, there were various attempts to generalize the 517(6)
       of the non-relativistic
symmetry                      quark model to a fully relativistic quantum
theory.3 These  attempts allfailed,and a number   of authors showed   under
various restrictiveassumptions that thisis in fact impossible.4 The most
far-reaching theorem of this sort was proved in 1967 by Coleman and
Mandula.5 They adopted reasonable assumptions about the finitenessof
the number of particletypes below any given mass, the existenceof
       at almost allenergies,and the analyticityof the 5-matrix, and used
scattering
them to show that the most general Lie algebra of symmetry operators
that commute with the 5-matrix, that take single-particle statesinto single-
particlestates,  and that act on multiparticle statesas  the direct sum of
theiraction on single-particle statesconsistsof the generators P^ and J^v
of the Poincare group, plus ordinary internalsymmetry generators that act
on one-particlestateswith matrices that are diagonal in and independent
of both momentum      and spin. We will use this theorem as an essential
ingredient in our analysis of all possible supersymmetry algebras in four
spacetime dimensions in Chapter 25, and in higher spacetime dimensions
in Chapter 32. In Section 32.3 we willconsider supersymmetry algebras in
theories that involve extended objects,for which the Coleman-Mandula
theorem does not apply.
   Coleman and Mandula's proof is ingenious and complicated. A version
is presented in Appendix B to thischapter. In the present sectionwe shall
give a very simple purely kinematic proof of one piece of this theorem,
but thispiece is enough to show clearlywhy an unconventional symmetry
like 517(6) is possible in non-relativisticbut not in relativistic theories.
We shall use Lorentz invariance to show that if the Lie algebra of all
symmetry operators Ba that commute with the momentum         generators P^
consistsof the P^ themselves plus the Hermitian generators Ba of some
finite-parametersemi-simple compact* Lie subalgebra s/9 then the Ba
must be the generators of an ordinary internal symmetry, in the sense
that they act on single-particle stateswith matrices that are diagonal in
and independent of both momentum        and spin. No use is made in this
theorem of the properties of the 5-matrix, of the finitenessof the particle
spectrum, or of assumptions about how the symmetry generators act on
physical states.The Lie algebra of 517(6) is of course both semi-simple


* For thedefinition
                 of semi-simple
                             and compact Liealgebras,           inSection
                                                   seethefootnote
  15.2.
         24.1 Unconventional Symmetries and 'No-Go' Theorems              3

and compact, so thistheorem rules out the use of any such symmetry in
relativistic
           theoriesto derive relationsamong particlesof differentspin.
  Here is the proof. Let all symmetry generators that commute with
the four-momentum    P^ form a Lie algebra spanned by the generators Ba.
Consider the effecton these generators of a proper Lorentz transformation
xv _> A^vxv, which is represented on Hilbert space by the unitary operator
[/(A). It is easy to see that the operator (7(A)Ba(7~1(A) is a Hermitian
symmetry generator that commutes with A/Pv, so since A/ is non-
singular,this operator must commute with P^, and therefore must be a
linearcombination of the Ba:

                     U(A)Bair\A)        =                    ,       (24.1.1)
                                            Y,DP«(A)BP
                                             P
with D^a(A) a set of real coefficientsthat furnish a representation of the
homogeneous Lorentz group
                           D(Ai)D(A2)   = D(A1A2).                   (24.1.2)
Further, the U(A)B(XU~l(A) satisfythe same commutation relationsas the
Ba, so the structureconstants CL of thisLie algebra are invarianttensors
in the sense that
                     =                                           .   (24.1.3)
               Clp        E D^a(A)Df'f(A)Dyy(A'l)Cift
                         atp'y'
Contracting thiswith the corresponding equation for C5§, we find that

                         Sps = J^/KAJD^AJg/w             ,           (24.1.4)
                               p>6>
where gp$ isthe Lie algebra metric

                              «»s   £<&<#•                           (24-1-5)
                                     ay
Because allof these generators commute with P^, we have C*p = — Co =
0, so gm = gafl= 0.
   We will distinguish the symmetry generators other than the P^ by
using subscripts A, B, etc. in place of a, /J,etc. Using the vanishing
of CJB = -C^        in Eq. (24.1.5)gives gAB = ZcdC%cCbd-        We
assumedthat the generators Ba span a compact semi-simple Lie algebra,
so the matrix gAB is positive-definite.
                                      Eqs. (24.1.4)and (24.1.2)show that
the matrices gl/2D(A)g~l/2 furnish a real orthogonal and hence unitary
finite-dimensionalrepresentationof the homogeneous Lorentz group. But
because the Lorentz group is non-compact, the only such representation
is the trivialone, for which D(A) = 1. (This is the place where relativity
makes allthe difference;the semi-simple part of the Galilean group isthe
4                       24 HistoricalIntroduction

compact group S 17(2),which of course has an infinitenumber of unitary
finite-dimensionalrepresentations.) With D(A) = 1, the generators Ba
commute with U(A) for allLorentz transformations A^v.
  Acting on the state \p9n) of a single stable particlewith momentum  p*1
and spin and species labelled by a discreteindex n, an operator like Ba
that commutes with P^ can only yield a linearcombination of such states


                     BA\p,n) = Y,(bA(pj)     \p,m).               (24.1.6)
                                m

The fact that the Ba commute with what we called'boosts'in Section 2.5
implies that the ^(p) are independent of momentum,    and the fact that
the Ba commute with rotationsimplies that the bA(p) act as unit matrices
on spin indices, so the Ba are the generators of an ordinary internal
symmetry, as was to be proved.




                 24.2   The Birth of Supersymmetry

If theoreticalphysics followed logic in itsevolution, then afterthe proof
of the Coleman-Mandula      theorem someone seeking exceptions to this
theorem would have noticed that itdeals only with transformations that
take bosons into bosons and fermions into fermions and are therefore
        by operators that satisfycommutation relationsrather than anti-
generated
commutation relations.This would have raised the question of whether
a relativistictheory can have symmetries acting non-triviallyon particle
spins  that take fermions and bosons into each other, and that
therefore
     satisfyanticommutation relationsrather than commutation relations.
Exploring the possible structure of such a superalgebra along the lines
described in the following chapter, supersymmetry would have emerged
as the only possibility.
  This is not what happened. Instead, supersymmetry arose in a series
of articleson string theory and independently in a pair of little-noticed
papers, about which more later,none of which show any sign that the
authors were at allconcerned with the Coleman-Mandula       theorem.
  Starting in the late 1960s, the effortto construct 5-matrix elements for
strong-interactionprocesses that would satisfyvarious theoretical
       led to a new picture of various types of hadrons, as differentmodes
requirements
of vibration of a string.6A point on a string labelled by a parameter a
willat time t on some fixedclock have spacetime coordinates X^(a, t),so
the theory of a string'smotion in d spacetime dimensions may be regarded
                     24.2 The Birth of Supersymmetry                             5

as a two-dimensional fieldtheory with d bosonic fields,with action
                                        'dX» dXv      dX* dXv~
            I[X] =
                     -Jdajdxrlflv        dx dx            da       da
                              , -        dX» dXv
                 = „T f , + f da                                            ^^
                                                                            (24.2.1)
                      J da-J      ^^,
where T is a constant known as the string tension; /x = 0, 1,...,d — 1;
and (j± are the two-dimensional light-cone' coordinates a± = x + a.
This action can be derived from a more general version, with complete
invariance*under transformations of a pair of 'worldsheetcoordinates'o^




by passing to a specialcoordinate system in which the worldsheet metric
gki satisfies
            the condition

                        v^g"        =                 •                     (24-2.3)
                                        ( J   _°! )
In much the same way that in electrodynamics the problems introduced by
the negative sign of the action for timelike photons are eliminated by the
gauge invariance of the theory,here the problems introduced by the
    sign of ^v in Eqs. (24.2.1)and (24.2.2)for \i= v = 0 are eliminated by
negative
the invariance of the action (24.2.2)(forappropriate boundary conditions)
under general transformations of the worldsheet coordinates. In the
    coordinate system in which the action takes the form (24.2.1),
special                                                            there is
an important remnant    of invariance under general worldsheet coordinate
transformations: invariance under the global conformal transformations:

                               a±^f±{a±)9                                   (24.2.4)
with /± a pair of independent arbitraryfunctions.
  The particlesdescribed by this string theory do not match those seen
in the real world. Ramond7    and Neveu and Schwarz8 in 1971, aiming
respectivelyto introduce particleswith half-integerspin or with the
    numbers of pions,suggested the addition ofd fermionic fielddoublets
quantum
!/^(<7,t)and \p%(<T9x).Shortly after,Gervais and Sakita9 introduced an
action for this theory:
  *r*r i      f , -u f , _ r^^AT* dXu     u d                        u d      1
  I[X9V]              da   \T—        + n^—1/,2,               +                ,
           =Jdo+j                 j£                               iV?^zVi,J
                                                                            (24.2.5)

*This
     symmetry isviolatedby quantum anomalies,likethosediscussedin Chapter
 22,exceptind = 26 spacetimedimensionsforthe purelybosonictheory,or d = 10
                              offermions.
 dimensionsaftertheintroduction
6                        24 HistoricalIntroduction

and noted that conformal invariance could be maintained by extending
the conformal transformations (24.2.4)to act also on the fermion fields




Gervais and Sakita pointed out that,in addition to two-dimensional
       invariance and d-dimensional Lorentz invariance, for appropriate
conformal
boundary conditions thistheory has a symmetry under infinitesimal
           that interchange the bosonic fieldX1* with the fermionic fields
transformations
tpf:

          Sxp$(a+9G~) = iT a2(0       ^r*>+>
                                                   O   >

          5y{V>0        =                                              (24.2.7)
                            iTa^jt-XVia*,*-),
          <5X>+,     a") = a2(0   y£(<x+,O      + ai(<r+)tpfr*, a~),
where ai and a2 are a pair of infinitesimalfermionic functions of <7+
and (j~,respectively,likethe Grassmann variablesintroduced in Section
9.5. This was an example of what has subsequently come to be called
supersymmetry, a symmetry connecting bosons and fermions, but thus
far it was only a symmetry of a two-dimensional fieldtheory, not of a
physical theory in four spacetime dimensions.
  A few years laterWess and Zumino10 referred back to the example of
supersymmetry that had been provided by References 7-9, and commented
that it would be natural to try to extend the idea of supersymmetry to
quantum fieldtheories in four spacetime dimensions. They constructed
several supersymmetric models. The simplest involved a singleMajorana
(self-charge-conjugateDirac) fieldxp9a pair of realscalarand pseudoscalar
bosonic fieldsA and B, and a pair of real scalar and pseudoscalar
bosonic auxiliaryfieldsF and G, with invariance under the infinitesimal
transformation**
              SA = (otxp),    SB = —i (ocysxp) ,

              dip = d^A + iy5B)y^(x+ (F- iy5G)(x,                      (24.2.8)
              SF =                ,      SG =
                      (oty^d^                   -i(^ysyfldflxp^ ,
where a isan arbitraryconstant infinitesimalMajorana fermion c-number

*•The notationforDiracmatricesusedhereis
                                          explainedinthePrefaceand inSection
                                   y\ = 1)isa factorof itimesthatused by Wess
  5.4.The y5 usedhere(whichsatisfies
  and Zumino, and thecovariantconjugatexpof any spinorxpisdefinedhereas itimes
  thatofWess and Zumino.Forthisreason, some ofthephasesinEqs.(24.2.8)-(24.2.10
  aredifferentfrom thoseinReference10.
                     24.2 The Birth of Supersymmetry                    1

parameter. If we require invariance of the action under these
         then the most general real,Lorentz-invariant,parity-conserving,
transformations,
renormalizable Lagrangian density builtout of these ingredientsis

            <£ = - tfpA SM    -         -
                               \d^B d^B   fry^tp
                 + {{F2 + G2) + m [FA + GB-   \xpxp]
                 + g \F{A2 + B2) + 2GAB   - xp(A +            .    (24.2.9)
                                                      iy5B)xp\
Since the auxiliaryfieldsF and G enter quadratically,we can derive an
equivalent Lagrangian by settingthem equal to the values given by the
fieldequations

       F = -mA   -                    G = -mB   -           .
                     g(A2 + B2),                     2gAB         (24.2.10)
The Lagrangian density then becomes

     <£ = - \.d^Ad»A - idpB d»B - ifpytdptp
          -±m2[A2 + B2]- \m\p\p
                         -                -
          -gmA(A2 + B2)     \g2 (A2 + B2)2 gxp(A + iy5B)xp. (24.2.11)
This Lagrangian density exhibits relationsnot only between scalar and
fermion masses, but also between Yukawa interactionsand scalar self-
couplings, which are characteristicof supersymmetric theories.Wess and
Zumino also described supersymmetry transformations and gave a
Lagrangianfor a supermultiplet containing a vector field.(We shall go into
allthis in more detailin Chapter 26.) Finally,in a second paper, Wess
and Zumino11 recalled the Coleman-Mandula         theorem and traced the
apparent  violationof  thistheorem  to the fact that the symmetry
     here atisfyanticommutation rather than commutation relations.It
generators
was a few more years before Gliozzi, Scherk and Olive1la showed that it
was possible to construct a superstring theory with spacetime as well as
worldsheet supersymmetry by imposing suitableperiodicityconditions on
the fieldsof the Ramond-Neveu-Schwarz       model.
  Unknown     to Wess and Zumino, at the time of their firstpapers on
supersymmetry in four spacetime dimensions this symmetry had already
appeared in a pair of papers published in the Soviet Union. In 1971
Gol'fand and Likhtman12 had extended the algebra of the Poincare group
discussed in Section 2.4 to a superalgebra and used the requirement
of invariance under this superalgebra to construct supersymmetric field
theoriesin four spacetime dimensions. Their paper though prophetic gave
few details,and was generally ignored until much later. Independently
Volkov and Akulov13 in 1973 discovered what today would be called
spontaneously broken supersymmetry, but they used their formalism to
identifythe Goldstone fermion associated with supersymmetry breaking
8                       24 HistoricalIntroduction

with the neutrino, an idea that met with no success. For most theorists,
especiallyoutside the Soviet Union, supersymmetry as a possiblesymmetry
of nature in four spacetime dimensions began with the 1974 papers of
Wess and Zumino.



Appendix   A    S U(6) Symmetry       of Non-Relativistic Quark    Models

This appendix willdescribe the way that an 5 17(6)symmetry that relates
particlesof differentspin arisesin non-relativistic  quark models. This has
nothing directlyto do with supersymmetry, but it provides the historical
background for the Coleman-Mandula         theorem, which is an essential
input to the  construction of  general supersymmetry algebras in Sections
25.1 and 31.1.
  In general, the Hamiltonian of the non-relativistic     quark model could
depend  not only  on positions and momenta   but  also on  the spin and flavor
operators o-p   and  Aj, where   the op (with  i =  1, 2, 3) act on the spin
indices of the nth quark as the Pauli matrices G[ defined by Eq. (5.4.18),
while the X^ (with A = 1, 2, ..., 8) act on the flavor indices of the
nth quark as the Gell-Mann 517(3) matrices Xa defined by Eq. (19.7.2).
(Where n refersto an antiquark, of* and X^ act as the matrices —aj
and — )JA of the contragredient representations.) If we were to assume
only that there isno spin-orbitcoupling, so that the totalorbitalangular
momentum     L,-is separately conserved, then we could conclude only that
the Hamiltonian commutes with the total spin and unitary spin

                  S,=   i                                           (24.A.1)
                            :>><">,        r,SiJ>}>,
                             n                     n
as well as L,-. On the other hand, if we were to suppose that the
Hamiltonian depends only on quark positions and momenta, and not at
allon spins or quark flavors,then such a Hamiltonian would commute
not only with the totalorbital angular momentum    L, but also with each
of the operators <r\n'and X^\ In between these two extremes there is the
interestingpossibilitythat in addition to commuting with the L„ $, and
Ta, the Hamiltonian also commutes with the operators

                             flu-iEi^!?,                            (24.A.2)
                                      n
where the sign is + or — for quarks and antiquarks,respectively.*The 5/,
Ta, and Ria form the Lie algebra of the group 517(6),with commutation

*The minus
           signforantiquarks     becausethetermsin RiAforantiquarks
                            arises                                must act
                        as thematrix— (<7jXA)T
 on spinand flavorindices                   = — (—oJ)(—Aj).
      Appendix A    517(6) Symmetry of Non-RelativisticQuark Models    9

relations

  [Si,Sj] = i^2eiJkSk ,     [TA , TB] = i^/abcTc    ,   [# , 7^] = 0 ,
              k                           c
  [St,RJA] =  iJ2 djkRkA , [TA , Hb]    = i£ /^cftc ,          (24.A.3)
                k                           C
  [RAi, Rbj] = i<*ij
                   ^2 fABC Tc + ¥&ab ^26iik sk + i^2€ijkdABcRkc •
                    C                   k          kC

Here /Ubc and d^c are respectivelytotallyantisymmetric and totally
                                 with independent non-vanishing values
symmetric numerical coefficients,14
given by

               /l23 = 1 >    /458 = /678 = V3/2 ,
                                                                 (24.A.4)
               /l47 = /l65 = /246 = /257 = /345 = /376 = 1/2 ,

and

      ^146 = ^157 = —^247 = ^256 = ^344 = ^355 = —^366 = ~^377 = 1/2 ,
      ^118 = ^228 = ^338 = —^888 = 1/V3 ,                        (24.A.5)
           =      =
      ^448 ^558 468      =     =
                           ^778 ~l/(2>/3) .

This is the symmetry    that remains if we include a spin- and flavor-
dependent two-body interactionin the Hamiltonian that commutes with
RiA as well as with the St and Ta. There are such interactions,given by
linearcombinations of two-body operators of the form


            fj(nm)OC i±E    a™*™          + EW                   (24.A.6)
                                      l

where the sign + is negative if one of the particlesn, m is a quark and
the other an antiquark and positive if they are both quarks or both
antiquarks.
  Of course, even in the non-relativistic
                                        quark model the 517(6) symmetry
isat best approximate. Itisbroken by spin-orbit and spin-spin forces,and
also by the mass of the 5 quark, which reduces the flavor 517(3) symmetry
to the 517(2) and 17(1) of isospin and hypercharge conservation. If we
avoid the effectsof this quark mass differenceby restrictingourselves to
hadrons built up from the lightu and d quarks and antiquarks, then the
only non-vanishing Aa matrices are the ka with a = 1,2, 3 (which for
the u and d quarks are given by the Pauli matrices (5.4.18)(that in this
context are conventionally called xa) and k% (which is just the number
l/>/3 for the u and d quarks, and —1/^/3 for the u and d antiquarks).The
10                     24 HistoricalIntroduction

interaction(24.A.6) thus becomes


          fj(nm)OC i±E*S    (n)ff(m) i±E       Jn) Jm)
                                                                 (24.A.7)
                                           A

Aside from quark number conservation, the remaining symmetry is then
517(4),with generators Si9Ta, and Ria which commute with (24.A.7).This
was proposed by Wigner2 in 1937 as a symmetry of nuclear forces,though
of course with protons and neutrons in place of u and d quarks. The
interaction (24.A.7) is known in nuclear theory as a Majorana potential
to distinguish it from an interaction that does not depend on spin or
isospin,called a Wigner potential,or an interaction proportional to just
the spin-dependent or just the isospin-dependent factorin (24.A.7), known
respectivelyas a Bartlettpotentialand a Heisenberg potential
  It is amusing to note that, although in non-relativistictheories there
is no theoreticalbarrier to symmetries like 517(6) that act on spin as
well as particletype, there never was any experimental evidencefor such an
assumed 517(6) symmetry of the non-relativisticquark model that isany
better
    satisfiedthan the assumption of complete spin and flavor independence.
These assumptions are not the same; if the Hamiltonian of a system of
N non-relativistic quarks and/or antiquarks is completely independent of
spin  and flavor, then its symmetry is SU(6)N9 not 517(6). For instance,
a two-particle interaction like (24.A.6) and various other multiparticle
interactionsbreak SU(6)N to 517(6). Of course, allthese symmetries are
only approximate anyway. The question is whether 517(6) is less badly
broken than 5 U(6)N1
  This cannot be answered by studying the multiplet that contains the
baryon octet,which consistsof the nucleon and hyperons A, Z, and S. In
the non-relativisticquark model these particlesare interpreted as bound
statesof three quarks with zero orbitalangular momentum.   Because these
states are color neutral, the wave function is completely antisymmetric
in the suppressed color indices,and therefore itis completely symmetric
under the combined interchange of spin and flavor. The baryon octet
would therefore have to be put in the symmetric third-rank tensor
            56 of 517(6), which besides the baryon octet contains a spin
representation
3/2 decuplet,which may be identifiedas the one consistingof the famous
'3-3'resonance A and the Z(1385), E(1530), and Q particles.(Numbers
in parentheses give masses in MeV, where these are needed to distinguish
the particlesfrom others of the same isospin and strangeness but lower
mass.) The 517(6) symmetry leads to good predictions for the baryon
magnetic moments: The quark charge operator is q = e(^/2 + X%/2yf?>\
so ifquarks have the magnetic moments Zq/2m^ of Dirac particlesof this
    Appendix A    SU(6) Symmetry of Non-RelativisticQuark Models       11

charge and mass m^/3, then the magnetic moment      operator is

                      Hi = 3hn
                                  5*3+2^*8
where hn = e/2m^ is the nuclear magneton, and Ria is defined by
Eq. (24.A.2). It is straightforward to calculate the matrix elements of
this symmetry generator between the members of the 56 multiplet,with
the resultthat the magnetic moments for p, n, A, Z+, Z~, S~, and E°
in units of hn are respectively+3, —2, —1, +3, —1, —1, and —2, which
may be compared with the corresponding experimental values +2.79,
-1.91, -0.61, +2.46, -1.16, -0.65, and -1.25. The agreement is fair,and
somewhat better (except for Z~) ifwe take the quark magnetic moment
to be a littleless than 3/x^. Because of the symmetry of the three-
quark wave function,nothing new is learned here ifwe assume that the
Hamiltonian is completely independent of spin and flavor; the statesof
zero angular momentum     would stillhave to fallin a multiplet consisting
of 6 x 7 x 8/6! = 56 members.         In particular,the operator (24.A.6)
has the same value 4 for any state of two quarks that is symmetric
under simultaneous interchange of their spins and flavors,whether it is
symmetric both under interchange of spins and interchange of flavors,or
antisymmetric under both interchanges.
  In order to decide whether 517(6) is any better than SU(6)N9 itis more
useful to study the mesons, which in the non-relativistic  quark model are
interpreted bound statesof quark and antiquark. the Hamiltonian
            as                 a                        If
of these states is completely independent of spin and flavor then its
symmetry is 517(6)2, and the meson states fallinto its 36-dimensional
(6,6)representation,while for 517(6) symmetry we could only say that the
mesons belong to either of the two representations of 517(6) contained
in 6 x 6: the adjoint representation 35 or the singletrepresentation. To
be more specific,the 35 consistsof an 517(3) singletwith spin 5 = 1, an
517(3) octet with 5 = 0, and an 517(3) octet with 5 = 1, corresponding to
the 517(6) generators 5/,Ta, and Ria, which is splitfrom the 517(3) singlet
statewith 5 = 0 by the interaction(24.A.6).Since allthese assumptions are
approximate anyway, the question in deciding whether 517(6) symmetry is
more accurate than complete spin and flavor independence iswhether the
splittingof the S(7(3) singlet5=0      statefrom the other 35 statesof the
same orbitalangular momentum       is any greater than the splittingswithin
the 35 supermultiplet.
  For orbitalangular momentum       L = 0 the quark-antiquark stateshave
negative parity P, and positive or negative charge-conjugation quantum
number C (forself-charge-conjugatestates)according to whether the total
spin 5 is zero or one, respectively.(For an explanation, see Section 5.5.)
The 35 therefore consistsof a singletwith JPC = 1 , a 0~+ octet,and
12                          24 HistoricalIntroduction

a 1    octet, which may be identifiedrespectivelyas: the 0(1020); the
pseudoscalar octet n9r\9K9 and K; and the vector octet p9co9 K*9 and K*.
There is also a 0~+ 51/(3) singletr\'at 958 MeV, which can be regarded
as the 51/(6) singlet.The splittingof this singlet from the particlesin
the 35 multiplet is not distinctlygreater than the splittingswithin the 35
multiplet.
  It may be argued that the L = 0 mesons do not provide a good
testof the symmetries of the non-relativistic  quark model, because they
include the Goldstone bosons %9 r\9K9 and K9 which become massless
for zero u and d quark masses and are therefore not well described by
this model. Therefore let us consider the quark-antiquark states with
L = 1. These stateshave P positive and C positive or negative according
to whether 5 = 1 or 5 = 0, so the p-wave 35 consistsof: 51/(3) singlets
with 5 = 1 and JPC = 0++, 1++, 2++, which may be identifiedas the
/o(1370), the /i(1285), and the /2(1270); an 5 = 0 1+" octet identified
as fei(1170),M1235), «i(1400), and Ki(1400); and 5 = 1 octets:a 0++
octet consistingof/0(980), a0(980),K^(1950), and KjJ"(1950);a 1++ octet
consistingof /i(1420),<*i(1260),^+(1650), and K^(1650); and a 2++ octet
consistingof/2(1430), a2(1320), K^(1980), and 1^(1980). In addition to
these 35 x 3 states,there is a another particle with the right quantum
numbers to be the p-wave 51/(6) singlet:the l+~ isoscalar/ii(1380).Of
course, we could interchange the identificationsof Aii(1170)and /*i(1380),
or identifythe 517(3) singletand octet isoscalarl+~ statesas orthogonal
linearcombinations of h\(in0) and /*i(1380).The important point isthat
there are two of these l+_ isoscalars,with no indicationthat one of them,
belonging to an 51/(6) singlet,ismore strongly splitfrom the particlesof
the 35 than the particlesof the 35 are splitfrom each other. Here too,
then, there isno evidence that 51/(6) symmetry is any more accurate than
the stronger assumption of complete spin and flavor independence.




             Appendix   B     The Coleman-Mandula       Theorem


This appendix provides a proof of the celebrated theorem of Coleman
and Mandula5 that the only possible Lie algebra (as opposed to super-
algebra) of symmetry generators consists of the generators P^ and J^v
of translationsand homogeneous Lorentz transformations, together with
possible internal symmetry generators, which commute with P^ and J^v
and act on physical states by multiplying them with spin-independent,
              Appendix B    The Coleman-Mandula      Theorem             13

momentum-independent      Hermitian matrices.* By 'symmetry generators'
here ismeant any Hermitian operators: that commute with the 5-matrix;
whose commutators are also symmetry generators; which take one-particle
statesinto one-particlestates;and whose action on multiparticlestatesis
the directsum of their action on one-particlestates (as in Eq. (24.B.1)).
A further technical requirement will be added when needed later.Apart
                                         quantum mechanics described in
from the general principlesof relativistic
Chapters 2  and 3, the only other assumptions needed in this proof are:

Assumption 1 For any M     there are only a finitenumber of particletypes
with mass lessthan M.


Assumption 2 Any two-particlestate undergoes some reactionat almost all
energies(that is,at all energiesexcept perhaps an isolatedset).


Assumption 3 The amplitudes for elastictwo-body scatteringare analytic
functions of the scatteringangle at almost all energies and angles.**

It is not necessary to assume that the 5-matrix is governed by a local
quantum fieldtheory. The proof presented here is somewhat rearranged
and streamlined,and itspellsout some steps that Coleman and Mandula
leftto the reader.
  It is convenient to start by proving this theorem for the subalgebra
consistingof those symmetry generators Ba that commute with the four-
momentum     operator P^. (This part of the theorem is of some interest
in itself;it rules out symmetries in relativistic
                                                theories that act like the
517(6) symmetry of the non-relativistic quark model.) The action of such


 *As we shall in theories   with only masslessparticles
                                                     thereisalsothe possibility
              see,
  thatinadditionto the generators P^ and J^vthereareadditional
                                                             generatorsD and
  K^         outtheLiealgebraoftheconformalgroup.15
      thatfill
**                thisassumptionisnotsatisfiedintheories
                                                       withinfrared
  Strictly
         speaking,                                                 divergences
  such as quantum electrodynamics, where,as shown in Section13.3,the S-matrix
  elementforany one scatteringprocessinvolving chargedparticles
                                                             actuallyvanishes,
  exceptforelastic                  In Abeliangauge theories
                   forwardscattering.                      likeelectrodynamics
  thisproblem can be avoidedby applyingthe Coleman-Mandula theorem to the
  theorywitha fictitious
                       gauge boson mass,and thenworkingonlywith'infrared-safe'
  quantitieslikemassesand suitably         cross-sections
                                  integrated                       inthelimit
                                                       thatarefinite
  of zerogauge boson mass.There isno problem in non-Abeliangauge theories like
  quantum chromodynamics,inwhichallmasslessparticles  aretrapped— symmetries
  ifunbrokenwould onlygovern S-matrixelementsfor gauge-neutral   bound states,
  likethemesons and baryonsin quantum chromodynamics.As faras I know, the
  Coleman-Mandula theoremhasnotbeen provedfornon-Abeliangauge theories   with
  untrappedmassless         likequantum chromodynamicswithmany quarkflavors.
                    particles,
14                       24 HistoricalIntroduction

symmetry generators on multiparticlestatesis given by

             Ba\pm,     qn, ...)= *—'
                                   Y,(ba(p))
                                       \       , \ptri,qn,...)
                                             /m'm
                                    m!
                      +                                ••• ,
                         E(M4))j/>m,       qn', ...)+             (24.B.1)
                          ri
where m, n, etc. are discrete indices labelling spin z-components and
particletype for particlesof a definitemass J—Pn p^, and the ba(p) are
finiteHermitian matrices,which definethe action of the Ba on one-particle
states.
  Now, we can see from Eq. (24.B.1) that the mapping that takes the
Ba into ba(p) for some fixed p is a homomorphism    in the sense that the
commutation relations
                                       =                          (24.B.2)
                             [B«,B/d       i\£Cj,By
                                             y
are also satisfiedby the Hermitian matrices M?):

                       [MP), h{p)] = i£ dp byip).                 (24.B.3)
                                       y
A well-known theorem proved in Section 15.2 tellsus that any Lie
algebraof finiteHermitian matrices like Mp) must be a direct sum of a
compact semi-simple Lie algebra and [7(1)algebras.However, we cannot
immediately apply this result to the operator algebras Ba because the
homomorphism     between the operators Ba and matrices /?a(p)is not
        an isomorphism. For itto be an isomorphism would require also
necessarily
that whenever £acafra(p) = 0 for some coefficientsca and momentum
p, then £acaZ?a(/c)= 0 for all momenta k9 which is equivalent to the
condition £a caBa = 0.
  Instead of considering the homomorphism      that maps the Ba into the
one-particle matrices Mp), Coleman   and  Mandula   considered the
           that maps the Ba into the matrices that define the action of Ba
homomorphism
on two-particlestateswith fixed four-momenta p and q:
                         =
        (ba(p,q)) ,,         (bate)) , ^n + (ba(q)) , Sm>m .      (24.B.4)

The invariance of the 5-matrix for the elasticor quasi-elasticscatteringof
two particleswith four-momenta p and q into two particleswith momenta
p' and q', with masses y^-p^p^ = ^P^W          and
                                                    ^-q^q^
                                                              =
                                                                 yf-qpq11,
yieldsthe condition
           MP', q')S(p',qf;P,q) = Stf, qf;p,q) ba(p,q).           (24.B.5)
Here S(p',qr\p,q) is a matrix of the same dimensionality as b(p,q) and
b(p\ q'\ defined in terms of the connected 5-matrix elements S(pm, qn —►
               Appendix B    The Coleman-Mandula      Theorem             15

p'm',q'n')by

 S(pm,qn^      p'ml^q'ri)es S4(p'+q'-p-q)     (s(p',q';p,q)) , ,   . (24.B.6)

According to Assumption 2 and the optical theorem (see Section 3.6),
for almost any choice of p and q the elasticscatteringamplitude is non-
vanishing in the forward direction,and Assumption 3 then tellsus that
the matrix S{p',qr\p,q)isnon-singular for almost allp' and qf on the same
mass shellsand satisfyingthe conservation condition pf+ qf = p + q, so for
almost allsuch four-momenta Eq. (24.B.5)is a similaritytransformation.
   It follows then that if Sacafra(P><?)= 0 for almost any fixed four-
momenta p and q, then £a cafra(p',  qf) = 0 for almost any four-momenta
pf and qf on the same mass shellsthat satisfyp'+q' = p+q. Unfortunately,
this does not tellus that ^2acaba(j/) and SacaM<?') vanish, but only
that these matrices are proportional to the unit matrix (with opposite
coefficients).To do better, it is necessary to consider not the ba(p) or
b<x(p,<?),but theirtracelessparts.
   One immediate consequence of Eq. (24.B.5)isthat

                         Trba(p',q')= Trba(p,q).                     (24.B.7)
With Eq. (24.B.4),thistellsus that

               W(V=^)trMp')           + N(^=^)trba(q')
                = N(^=^)trba(p)          + N(^=^)trba(q),            (24.B.8)
where N(m) is the multiplicity*of particletypes with mass m, and the
lower case t in 'tr'indicates a sum over one-particle rather than two-
particlelabels.In order for this to be satisfiedfor almost allmass-shell
four-momenta for which pf + q' = p + q, itis necessary that the function
trba(p)/N(yJ—pflp^) be linear1"1"
                               in p:

                              trMp)    =^na«p»>                   (24B9)
                          n(V=p^)
with a% independent of p (and of everything elsebut the displayed indices.)
We may define new symmetry generators by subtracting terms linear in


 fThesemultiplicity      werenotshown explicitly
                   factors                      by Coleman and Mandula. They
  areneededinjustifyinga stepthatColeman and Mandula made withoutexplanation,
  thatof definingthesymmetrygeneratorsBj withtracelesskernels.
tfA constantterm iseasilyseento be ruledout in Eq. (24.B.9) by theexistenceof
  processesin which the number of particles
                                          isnot conserved,processes which are
  inevitablein any relativistic
                             quantum theorysatisfyingthe clusterdecomposition
  principle.Even ifwe consideredonly two-particleprocessesand did not use this
  argument,a constantterm in Eq. (24.B.9)would only amount to a change in the
  actionofinternalsymmetrieson physical
                                      states.
16                      24 HistoricalIntroduction

the momentum    operator P^:

                              BjsB.-ogP,,,                         (24.B.10)
which according to Eq. (24.B.9)are represented on one-particlestatesby
the tracelessmatrices

                                                               <"*»>
           («wL-(**>L-sg^j*-
Because P^ commutes with Ba and the unit matrix commutes with
      the commutators of the B* are the same as those of the Ba, and the
everything,
commutators of the b\{p) are the same as those of the Mp):

       [Bj, Bj] = i£           = i
                       C^By       £     Clp [B* + ojfpj ,          (24.B.12)


       [b*M, b*(p)] = i£ Clpby(p) = i£ CJ, [tif(p)
                                                 +       .
                                                   a!}p,] (24.B.13)
                        y             y
Also, Eq. (24.B.13) and the fact that commutators of the finite
    b\(p) have zero trace* imply that £y CL o£ = 0, and using this in
matrices
Eq. (24.B.12) then shows that the Bf satisfythe same commutation
relations
      as the Ba:
                                   =                               (24.B.14)
                         [BlBJ]         iJ2CyapBf.
                                          y
Because Bf is a symmetry generator, the scatteringamplitude satisfies

          bUp',q')S(p',q';p,q)= S(p',q';p,q)b*(p,q),               (24.B.15)
               q) are the matrices representing the Bf on the two-particle
where the fr|(p,
states



and satisfythe same commutation        relationsas the Bf:

                  [*S(p,«),6J(P,«)] = i£ Ca/>&?(P>«) •             (24.B.17)
                                        y
The advantage of dealing with these two-particle matrices is that, since
S(p',q';p,g) isa non-singular matrix, itfollows that if£a catf(p,q) = 0 for
some fixed mass-shell four-momenta p and q, then £a cafr$(p',   q') = 0 for

* Thisisone of the placeswhere we use Assumption 1,withoutwhich commutators
  need not have zerotrace.Also,at thispointitiscrucialthatwe are dealingwith
  commutationratherthan anticommutationrelations,sincetheunitmatrixdoes not
  anticommutewith othermatrices, and anticommutatorsof finitematricesdo not
            havezerotrace.
  necessarily
             Appendix B     The Coleman-Mandula    Theorem             17

almost allp' and q[ on the same respectivemass shellswith p'+ q' = p + q.
Because we are dealing now with tracelessmatrices, thistellsus that
                                 =           =
                     ]T ca blip1) y.c* *S(«') ° •               (24B18)
                      a            a
We would liketo conclude from thisthat £a catf(/c)= 0 for allmass-shell
                                                                = 0 for
four-momenta k, but so far we have proved only that £a ca frf(p')
                                  =
almost allof those p' for which q' p + q—p' as well as p' ison the mass
shell(and correspondingly for qf.)To get around this limitation,we can
use a trick of Coleman and Mandula, noting that if £a ca tf(p, q) = 0
then (24.B.18)and (24.B.16)together yield
                                         =
                            £cafr#(p, <?') <),
                             a
so that,according to Eq. (24.B.15),


                        a
and therefore
                                          = 0,                  (24.B.19)
                             £cafr#(/c)
                              a
for almost allmass-shell four-momenta k for which p + qf —k is also on
the mass shell.Now, the conditions that qf and p + q — qf be on the mass
shellleave two parameters free in q\ so that we have enough freedom in
choosing qf that the condition that p + qf — k ison the mass shellleaves us
free to choose k to be anything we like,at leastwithin a finitevolume of
momentum     space. This volume can be adjusted to be as large as we like
by taking p and q sufficiently large,so if £a cab\{p,q) = 0 for some fixed
mass-shellfour-momenta p and q then £a catf(/c)= 0 for almost allmass-
shellfour-momenta k. But then if £a catf(ko) ^ 0 for some particular
mass-shellfour-momentum ko, a scatteringprocess in which particleswith
four-momenta ko and k scatterinto particleswith four-momenta k! and
k" willbe forbidden by the symmetry generated by £a caBf for almost all
k, k',and /c",in contradiction with our assumption about the analyticity
of the scatteringamplitude. We conclude then that if £a cab$(p,q) = 0
for some fixed mass-shell four-momenta p and q then £a catf(k) = 0 for
allk, and therefore £a caBf = 0, so that the mapping that takes Ba into
b\{p,q) isan isomorphism.
   One immediate consequence is that, since the number of independent
matrices b\{p,q) cannot exceed Ni^J—p^)Ni^J—q^),            there can be at
most a finitenumber of independent symmetry generators Ba. As
emphasizedby Coleman and Mandula, in proving their theorem it is not
necessary to make an independent assumption that the symmetry algebra
isfinite-dimensional.
18                       24 HistoricalIntroduction

  The theorems of Section 15.2 tellus further that a Lie algebra of finite
Hermitian matrices like b\(p,q) for fixed p and q is at most the direct
sum of a semi-simple compact Lie algebra and some number of U(l) Lie
algebras. We have seen that thisLie algebra is isomorphic to that of the
symmetry generators Bf, so the Bf must also span the direct sum of at
most a compact semi-simple Lie algebra and U(l) Lie algebras.
  Let us firstdispose of the U(l) Lie algebras. For any pair of mass-shell
momenta p and q we can find a Lorentz generator J that leaves both
p and q invariant. (Ifp and q are lightlikeand parallelthen take J to
generate rotations around the common     direction of p and q. Otherwise,
p + q will be timelike, so we can take J to generate rotations around
the common    direction of p and q in the center-of-mass frame in which
p = —q.) We  can  choose the basis of two-particlestatesto diagonalize J,
so that

                       J\pm, qn) = a(m, n)\pm,qn) .                 (24.B.20)
Now, P^ commutes with all Bf, and [J,P^\ is a linear combination of
components of P^, so P^ commutes with all [J,Bf], and therefore the
symmetry generator [J,Bf] must be a linearcombination of the Bp, which
by definitionform a complete set of symmetry generators that commute
                          since the matrices representing a commutator
with P^. More specifically,
of symmetry generators are necessarilytraceless,[J,Bf] has to be a linear
combination of the Bf. But any U(l) generator Bf (taken Hermitian) in
the algebra of the B\ would have to commute      with allthe Bf, and hence
in particularmust commute    with [J,Bf]:

                            [B?, [J,B?]]=0.
Taking the expectation value of thisdouble commutator      in the two-particle
basis in which J is diagonal, we have
                                                      i2
        0-£(«**-.<*.>)                (iffe,))                      (24.B.21)
            m',n
for any m and n. The indicesrun over a finiterange, so ifthere were any
a for which there existed an m and n with tr(m,n) = a and an m' and ri
          ri)^ a, with (bf(p,q))mfri,mn
with 0-(m',                            ^ 0> then there would have to be
a smallestsuch a, in which case the right-hand side of Eq. (24.B.21) for
this m and n would be positive-definite, contradicting Eq. (24.B.21).We
                             must vanish for allm, n, m', and nf for which
conclude that (bf(p,q))m'nf,mn
a(m',n')^ <r(m,n).Because the algebra of the bf(p,q) isisomorphic to that
of the Bf, thismeans that each of the U(l) generators Bf commutes with
J. Since we can choose p + q to be in any timelike direction,itfollows that
                 Appendix B        The Coleman-Mandula      Theorem         19

each of the 17(1)generators Bf commutes with allthe generators J^v of the
homogeneous Lorentz group. The fact that they commute with what we
called'boosts'in Section 2.5 implies that the (bf(p))nfnare independent of
three-momentum, and the fact that they commute with rotations implies
that the {bf(p))n>n
                  act as unit matrices on spin indices,so these generators
are the generators of an ordinary internalsymmetry.
  This leaves the B* that generate a semi-simple compact Lie algebra.
The argument of Section 24.1 (a somewhat more explicitversion of the
reasoning given by Coleman and Mandula) tellsus that the generators of
the semi-simple compact part of the Lie algebra commute with Lorentz
transformations and, as shown for the U(l) generators, this means that
they too are the generators of internal symmetries. We have thus shown
that the symmetry generators Ba that commute with P^ are eitherinternal
symmetry generators or linear combinations of the components of P^
itself.
  Next, we must take up the possibilityof symmetry generators that do
not commute with the momentum         operator. The action of a general
symmetry generator A<x on a one-particlestate \pn) of four-momentum      p
would be

            A* \P,n)=                                                 (24.B.22)
                           E/<*V       (statf,p))jn \M,
                            n'
where n and nf are again discreteindiceslabellingboth spin z-components
and particletypes.Of course, the kernel s/a(p\p) must vanish unless both
p and p' are on the mass shell. We shall show firstthat the j/a(p',p)
vanishes for any p' ^ p.
  For this purpose, note that ifAa is a symmetry generator, then so is

          A{ =    f d4x exp( iPx)       Aa exp(-*P •x)f(x),           (24.B.23)

where P^ isthe four-momentum   operator, and f(x) isa function that can
be chosen as we like.Acting on a one-particlestate,this gives

      4    \P,n)=                  J(P'-P) (sfatftP))^ IpV),          (24.B.24)
                    E/^V

where / isthe Fourier transform

                        f(k) =      f d4x exp(ix •k)f(x).             (24.B.25)

Suppose that there is some pair of mass-shell four-momenta p and p + A
with A ^ 0 such that stf(p+ A, p) ^ 0. Generic mass-shell four-momenta
q, p',and qf with pf + qf = p + q willnot have q + A or p' + A or q' + A
on the mass shell.If we take f(k) to vanish outside a sufficiently small
20                      24 HistoricalIntroduction

region around A, then A{ willannihilateallone-particlestateswith four-
momenta q,p',and q\ but not the one-particlestateswith four-momentum
p, so such a symmetry would forbid any scatteringprocess in which any
particlesof momenta p and q go into any particlesof momenta p' and q\
in contradiction with the consequence of Assumptions 2 and 3 that there
issome scatteringat almost allenergies and angles.
  This resultdoes not mean that any symmetry generator Aa must
      with P^, because the kernels stfa(p\p) may include terms proportional
commute
to derivativesof <54(p'— p) as well as terms proportional to S4(p'— p)
     To deal with this possibility,
itself.                             Coleman and Mandula made the 'ugly
technical assumption' that the kernels j/a(p/,p) are distributions,  which
means that each can contain at most a finitenumber Da of derivatives
of S4(p' — p). To put this another way, each symmetry generator Aa is
assumed to act on one-particlestatesas a polynomial of order Da in the
derivativesd/dp^ with matrix coefficientsthat at this point are allowed
to depend on momentum      and spin.To use the above resultsfor symmetry
generators that commute with the momentum         operators, Coleman and
Mandula considered the Da-fold commutator of momentum             operators
with Aa

            B^0"    = [P"1,[P"2,...[P^M       ]...].              (24.B.26)
The matrix elements of the commutators of B%1 fiD<x     with P^ between
stateswith four-momenta p' and p are proportional to Da + 1 factors of
p' — p, times a polynomial of order Da in momentum      derivativesacting
on S4(pf— p), and thereforevanish. Since the generators B£l ^Da commute
with the momentum     operators, according to the resultsobtained so far
they act on one-particlestateswith matrices of the form

                   bp'^ip)    = rf"1'""*+ aT'^Pv       1,         (24.B.27)

where the h*"1*0* are momentum-independent        tracelessHermitian
                 an            internal                               flD(X
matrices
      generating     ordinary           symmetry algebra, and the a^1
are momentum-independent      numerical constants, with both h*"1*0* and
     Wa              in the indices     ••-
a^1      symmetric                  /xi fiDa> Also, even though the Aa
do not necessarilycommute with P^, they cannot take one-particlestates
off the mass shell,so since Assumption 1 requires that the mass-squared
operator —P^P^1 has only discreteeigenvalues,the A<x must commute with
-P^P*1. It follows in particularthat for D > 1
           0=   [P^P^,[P^,...[P^,Aa]      ]...] =2P,X•••"*    ,
so that

                             o = pw &£'-'*'(p).                   (24.B.28)
             Appendix B      The Coleman-Mandula        Theorem         21

As long as the theory contains massive particlesthismust be satisfiedfor
p in any timelike direction,so for Da > 1

                                 btov-fiD*=0?                     (24.B.29)
and

                          aT"^       = -aT"»D*   .                (24.B.30)

But for Da > 2 Eq. (24.B.30) together with the symmetry of a^1 "^
in the indices ii\-miiDa would require that a^1 fiD(X  = 0. (For then
amnr~HDx   __ aW2Hi~HDa __ __amm~'HDx   __ __an2MH'~HDa __ ^xw-v-d* __
Jpm-VD* = J*amnr~HDaj Weaare leftwith almost two kinds of non-
vanishing symmetry generator: those with Da = 0, for which the generator
A<x commutes with P^ and thereforemust be eitheran internalsymmetry
generator or some linearcombination of the P^; and those with Da = 1,
in which case

                             [P\A«]=a^P^                          (24.B.31)

with a^ some numerical constants antisymmetric in /xand v. Eq. (24.B.31)
requiresthat

                          Aa = ~ii<^v+Ba,                         (24.B.32)

where J^v is the generator of proper Lorentz transformations, which
according to Eq. (2.4.13)satisfies[P\JP<7] = -irj^P0 + irivaPi>9 and Ba
commutes with P^. Since Aa and J^v are symmetry generators, so is
Ba, which must therefore be a linear combination of internal symmetry
generators and/or the components of P^. Eq. (24.B.32)thereforecompletes
the proof of the Coleman-Mandula    theorem.
                                    * * *
  In theorieswith only massless particlesEq. (24.B.30)does not necessarily
follow from Eq. (24.B.28);since p^p*1= 0, we can also have

                      aT"^        + flS1""71*oc r,™ .             (24.B.33)
In thiscase the symmetry algebra consistsof internalsymmetries plus the
algebra of the conformal group, which is spanned by generators K*1 and
D together with the generators J^v and P^ of the Poincare group. The
commutation relationsare

            [P", D] = iP",       [K", D] = -iK",
            [P", Kv] = Hrj^D + HJ^ ,        [K*, Kv] = 0 ,   (24.B.34)
            [J<", K»] = ir\^KG -  if]^Kp ,     [JP°, D] = 0,
22                         24 HistoricalIntroduction

together with the commutation      relations(2.4.12)-(2.4.14)
                                                            of the Poincare
algebra
               i [P\jpa]   = nvpra - ^pra - n^jpv + navj^,
               i [P" , JpG] = r\^pPG - rfGPp ,                    (24.B.35)
                [pn 9 PP] = o .
The infinitesimalgroup element

      [7(1+ (o,e,K P) = 1 + {i/2)J^v    + iP^   + UZ) + iK^p^     (24.B.36)
induces the infinitesimalspacetime transformation

         x" -► x^ + (o^vxv + 6^ + ^x^ + p^xvxv - 2x>y xv •        (24.B.37)
These are the most general infinitesimalspacetime transformations that
leave the light-coneinvariant.



                                  Problems

     1. Show  that the most general symmetry algebra allowed under the
       assumptions of the Coleman-Mandula      theorem in the case where
       all particlesare massless consists of internal symmetry generators
       plus eitherthe Poincare algebra or the conformal algebra (24.B.34),
       (24.B.35).

     2. Show that the Gervais-Sakita action (24.2.5)is invariant under the
        worldsheet supersymmetry transformation (24.2.7).

     3. Calculate the change in the Wess-Zumino Lagrangian density(24.2.9)
        under the spacetime supersymmetry transformation (24.2.8).



                                  References

     1. B. Sakita, Phys. Rev. 136, B 1756 (1964); F. Gursey and L. A.
        Radicati, Phys. Rev. Lett. 13, 173 (1964); A. Pais, Phys. Rev. Lett.
        13, 175 (1964); F. Gursey, A. Pais, and L. A. Radicati, Phys. Rev.
        Lett. 13, 299 (1964).These articlesare reprinted in Symmetry Groups
        in Nuclear and Particle Physics, F J. Dyson, ed. (W. A. Benjamin,
        New York, 1966), along with a helpful set of Dyson's lecturenotes
        on this subject.
     2. E. P. Wigner, Phys. Rev. 51. 106 (1937). This is reproduced in
        Symmetry Groups in Nuclear and ParticlePhysics, Ref. 1.
                              References                             23

  3. A. Salam, R. Delbourgo, and J. Strathdee,Proc. Roy. Soc. (London)
     A 284, 146 (1965); M. A. Beg and A. Pais,Phys. Rev. Lett. 14, 267
     (1965); B. Sakita and K. C. Wali, Phys. Rev. 139, B 1355 (1965).
     These are reproduced in Symmetry Groups in Nuclear and Particle
     Physics, Ref. 1.
 4. W. D. McGlinn, Phys. Rev. Lett. 12, 467 (1964); O. W. Greenberg,
    Phys. Rev. 135, B 1447 (1964); L. Michel, Phys. Rev. 137, B 405
    (1964); L. Michel and B. Sakita, Ann. Inst.Henri-Poincare 2, 167
    (1965); M. A. B. Beg and A. Pais, Phys. Rev. Lett. 14, 509, 577
    (1965); S. Coleman, Phys. Rev. 138, B 1262 (1965); S. Weinberg,
    Phys. Rev. 139, B 597 (1965); L. O'Raifeartaigh, Phys. Rev. 139, B
    1052 (1965). These are reproduced in Symmetry Groups in Nuclear
    and ParticlePhysics, Ref. 1.
  5. S. Coleman   and J. Mandula, Phys. Rev. 159, 1251 (1967).
 6.   For an introduction with references to the original literature,see
      M. B. Green, J. H. Schwarz, and E. Witten, Superstring Theory
      (Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 1987); J.Polchinski,String
      Theory (Cambridge University Press,Cambridge, 1998).
 7.   P. Ramond, Phys. Rev. D3, 2415 (1971). This articleis reprinted
      in Superstrings — The First 15 Years of Superstring Theory, J. H.
      Schwarz, ed. (World Scientific,
                                    Singapore, 1985).
 8.   A. Neveu and J.H. Schwarz, Nucl. Phys. B31, 86 (1971); Phys. Rev.
      D4, 1109 (1971).These articlesare reprinted in Superstrings— The
      First15 Years of Superstring Theory, Ref. 7. Also see Y. Aharonov,
      A. Casher, and L. Susskind, Phys. Rev. D5, 988 (1972).
 9.   J.-L.Gervais and B. Sakita,Nucl. Phys. B34, 632 (1971).This article
      is reprinted in Superstrings — The First 15 Years of Superstring
      Theory, Ref. 7.
 10. J. Wess and B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. B70, 39 (1974). This articleis
     reprinted in Super symmetry, S. Ferrara, ed. (North Holland/World
     Scientific,
               Amsterdam/Singapore, 1987).
 11. J. Wess and B. Zumino, Phys. Lett. 49B, 52 (1974). This articleis
     reprinted in Super symmetry, Ref. 10.
\\a. F. Gliozzi,J. Scherk, and D. Olive, Nucl. Phys. B122, 253 (1977).
12. Yu. A. Gol'fand and E. P. Likhtman, JETP Letters 13, 323 (1971).
    This articleis reprinted in Super symmetry, Ref. 10.
13. D. V. Volkov and V. P. Akulov, Phys. Lett. 46B, 109 (1973). This
    articleis reprinted in Super symmetry, Ref. 10.
14. M. Gell-Mann, Cal. Tech. Synchotron Laboratory Report CTSL-20
    (1961),unpublished. This is reproduced along with other articleson
24                   24 HistoricalIntroduction

     SU(3) symmetry in M. Gell-Mann and Y. Ne'eman, The Eightfold
     Way (Benjamin, New York, 1964).
 15. R. Haag, J. T. Lopuszanski, and M. Sohnius, Nucl Phys, B88, 257
     (1975).This articleis reprinted in Super symmetry, Ref. 10.
                                  25


               Supersymmetry                  Algebras




This chapter willdevelop the form of the supersymmetry algebra from first
principles,following the treatment of Haag, Lopuszanski, and Sohnius.1
As we shallsee,under conditions in which the Coleman-Mandula    theorem
applies, this structure is almost uniquely fixed by the requirements of
Lorentz invariance. The supermultiplet structure of one-particle states
willthen be deduced directlyfrom the supersymmetry algebra.



        25.1   Graded   Lie Algebras and Graded          Parameters

We saw in Section 2.2 how to express any continuous symmetry
           in terms of a Lie algebra of linearlyindependent symmetry
transformation
generators ta that satisfycommutation relations [ta,tb\= *ScC^c-      In
much the same way, supersymmetry is expressed in terms of symmetry
generators ta that form a graded Lie algebra,2 embodied in commutation
and anticommutation relationsof the form

                     tatb- {-\)™Hhta    = i
                                              Y, Ccahtc.              (25.1.1)
                                               c
(The summation convention is suspended in thissection.)Here r\afor each
a is either +1 or 0 and is known as the grading of the generator ta,and
the Ccabare a setof numerical structureconstants.Generators ta for which
r\a= 1 are calledfermionic; the others,for which r\a= 0, are calledbosonic.
Eq. (25.1.1)provides commutation relationsfor bosonic operators with
each other and with fermionic operators, but anticommutation relations
for fermionic operators with each other. We willcome back soon to the
motivation for Eq. (25.1.1);for the moment we willjust take a look at its
consequences for the structureconstants.
  According to Eq. (25.1.1),the structureconstants must satisfythe
conditions

                          CL = -(-^arjhCcab .                         (25.1.2)

                                   25
26                        25 Supersymmetry Algebras

For any operator formed as a functional of fieldoperators, the products
of two bosonic or two fermionic operators are bosonic, and the products
of a fermionic with a bosonic operator are fermionic, so that

                 Ccab= 0 unless r\c= r\a+ r\b(mod 2).             (25.1.3)
Also, for any operator formed in this way, the Hermitian adjoint of a
bosonic or fermionic operator is,respectively,bosonic or fermionic.If the
ta are Hermitian operators, then the structureconstants satisfya reality
condition

                                C«V = -Ccba ■                     (25.1.4)
  The structureconstants also satisfya non-linear constraint,which
     from a super-Jacobi identity
follows

     {-Wna[[ta,tbUc}   + (-lTam[[tb,tc},ta}+ {-\)™<[[tc,taltb} =0.
                                                                    (25.1.5)
Here '[...}' denotes a commutator/anticommutator       like that appearing
on the left-hand side of Eq. (25.1.1),but here extended to any graded
operators O, O', etc.
             = 00' - (-lf^'O'O         = -(-If (°M°')[0',0},        (25.1.6)
     [0,0'}
itnow being understood that any product O = tatbtc -of generators is
                                        "'
given a grading rj(0)= f]a+ ^b + ^c +       (mod 2).(To prove Eq. (25.1.5),
itis sufficient o prove that the coefficientsof tatbtcand tatctbvanish, for
then the symmetry of the left-hand side of Eq. (25.1.5)under the cyclic
permutations abc —► bca —► cab willensure that the coefficients of allother
products  of generators also vanish. The  coefficient
                                                    of       in
                                                       tatbtc Eq. (25.1.5)
is
                                                _ 0
                   f—iyicla_ <_iyiaribf_iyia(rib+ric)
while the coefficientof tatctbis



completing the proof.)By insertingEq. (25.1.1)in Eq. (25.1.5),
                                                             we find the
constraint

                       + £(-i)™»c£ci     + Yli-W'cLCdb      = o • (25.1.7)
 £(-i)M<*qc
  d                       d                 d
Of course, in the case where allgenerators are bosonic Eq. (25.1.5)is the
usual Jacobi identity,and Eq. (25.1.7)is the usual non-linear condition
(2.2.22)on the structureconstants.
  Eq. (25.1.1)can be taken as our startingpoint, but itcan also be given
a motivation like that given for ordinary Lie algebras in Section 2.2, as
a necessary feature of finitecontinuous symmetry transformations. The
            25.1 Graded Lie Algebras and Graded Parameters            27

differenceisthat now these transformations depend on continuous graded
parameters. A set of graded c-number parameters can be thought of as
'numbers,' including Grassmann parameters (see Section 9.5) as well as
ordinary numbers, which satisfythe associativeand distributiverules of
arithmetic,but which instead of simply commuting satisfyrelations

                          (xapb= (-l)^V        ,                 (25.1.8)
where <xa,(}a,...are used to distinguishdifferentvalues of the ath
     in the same way that in vector algebra we might letva and ua denote
parameter,
the a-components of differentvalues of some real vector. Again the ath
graded parameter is given a grading r\aequal to +1 or 0 when <xais a
fermionic or bosonic parameter, respectively.That is,these parameters
commute if either is bosonic, and anticommute if both are fermionic.
The product <xapbyc••• of a set of graded parameters is given the grading
*la+ Y]b+ v]cH   (mod 2); that is,such a product isfermionic ifitinvolves
an odd number of fermionic parameters, and is otherwise bosonic. With
thisgrading, itis easy to see that products of graded parameters satisfya
commutation or anticommutation rule just like Eq. (25.1.8).
   Consider a continuous transformation T(a), given by a formal power
seriesin the graded parameters <xa:

                T(a) = 1 + E «"*« + E a"a^         + ***   >     (2519)
                            a        ab
where ta, tab,etc. are a set of a-independent operator coefficients,
                                                                   not
yet assumed to satisfyany algebraic relationslike Eq. (25.1.1).Because
the parameters <xasatisfyEq. (25.1.8),the coefficientstab- must satisfy
symmetry/antisymmetry conditions,such as
                           U   = (-l)™^.                        (25.1.10)
It is convenient also to assume that the transformation T(p) commutes
with any value <xaof any graded parameter, in which case the operator
coefficientsin (25.1.9)satisfythe conditions

                          a%   = (-iy^a",                       (25.1.11)

                            = {-\f°^+^thc<xa
                       (xatbc                      .            (25.1.12)
That is,tb and t\>c ommute or anticommute with graded parameters as
if they were graded parameters themselves, with grading r\\>  and r\b+ *]c
(mod  2),respectively.
   The other constraintson these operators follow from the requirement
that the T(a) form a semi-group; that is,that the product of the operators
for differentvalues a and p of the graded parameters isitselfa T-operator

                        T(a)T(/?) = T(/(a,/?)),                 (25.1.13)
28                            25 Supersymmetry Algebras

where /c(a,/?)is itselfa formal power seriesin the graded parameters.
Because T(0)T(j3) = T(jS) and T(a)T(0) = T(a), we must have

                           /c(0,j3)= j3c,          /<(a,0) = ac,                 (25.1.14)
and thereforethe power seriesexpansion for /(a,/?)must take the form

                 r(a,jS) = ac + ^ + ^/^afl^       + --- ,        (25.1.15)
                                      ab
where /^ is a set of ordinary (that is, bosonic) constants, and '•••'
denotes terms of third or higher order in the graded parameters. In order
for /c(a,/?)to be a graded parameter, it is necessary for each term in
Eq. (25.1.15)to have the same grading, which implies that
                         fah = 0 unless r\c= r\a+ r\b(mod 2).                    (25.1.16)
Inserting the power series (25.1.9)and (25.1.15) into the product rule
(25.1.13)gives
            + ]Ta%       + ^aVu        + ••     +               + ErA*          + **
       [l                                  •] [l £/*%                               •]
               a            ab                    a                ab
        =                                      +
             i+£(ac+/r+E/>a/>6                     -->
                  c            ab

            +E(aC+^+---)(a"+^+'")^+'"
               cd
The coefficientsof 1, aa, pa, aaab, and f}af}bmatch on both sides of this
equation, but the condition that the coefficients
                                                of (xapbare the same yields
the non-trivialrelation
                     =                                   =           + 2tab •
     {-VP«natb           Ysfabtc + tab+ (-If^tba             ^fatc               (25.1.17)
                          c                                   c
(The sign factor on the left-hand side arisesfrom the interchange of ta
and pb.)Together with higher-order relationsof the same sort,thisallows
us to calculatethe whole function (25.1.9)if we know the generators ta
and the group-composition function /a(a,/?).But for this to be possible,
ta must satisfya constraint.Using Eq. (25.1.10),the differenceor sum of
Eq. (25.1.17)and the same equation with a and b interchanged yields the
Lie superalgebra relationsEq. (25.1.1),with structureconstants given by

                                  iCcab= (-l)™>fcab-fcba.                        (25.1.18)
Also, Eq. (25.1.3)follows immediately from Eqs. (25.1.16)and (25.1.18).
  The complex conjugate a* of an anticommuting c-number a is defined
so that the Hermitian adjoint of the product of a and an arbitraryoperator
0is

                                       (a&y = 0V      .                          (25.1.19)
                      25.2 Supersymmetry Algebras                            29

It follows that products of c-numbers behave the same under complex
conjugation as operators do under Hermitian conjugation:

                                 (apy = j8V ,                          (25.1.20)
and that a* has the same grading as a.
  The graded Lie algebras of importance to physics are severelyrestricted
by spacetime symmetries. We now turn to a consideration of these
restrictions.



                   25.2        Supersymmetry     Algebras

Consider a general graded Lie algebra of symmetry generators that
     with the S-matrix. If Q is any of the fermionic symmetry generators,
commute
then so will be U~l(A)Q 17(A), where [7(A) is the quantum mechanical
operator corresponding to an arbitrary homogeneous Lorentz
transformation
         AV   Therefore U~l(A)QU(A)       is a linear combination of the
complete  setof fermionic symmetry generators,and hence thisset of
        must furnish a representation of the homogeneous Lorentz group.
generators
The individual generators may therefore be classifiedaccording to the
irreduciblerepresentation of the homogeneous     Lorentz group to which
they belong.
  As described in Section 5.6, the representations of the homogeneous
Lorentz group furnished by any setof operators can be specifiedby giving
theircommutation relationswith generators A and B, defined by

              A = i        +                   B = i        -
                      (j       «) ,                    (j       «) ,    (25.2.1)

where J and K are the Hermitian generators of rotations and boosts,
            These satisfythe commutation relations
respectively.
   [Ai9Aj] = ]TeijkAk ,        [Bh Bj] = ]TeijkBk ,     [Ah Bj\=0,      (25.2.2)
              k                           k
where i,j, and k run over the values 1,2, 3, and e^ is totally
       with 6123 = +1- Thus representationsof the homogeneous Lorentz
antisymmetric,
group are labelled,like stateswith two independent spins,by a pair of
integers or half-integersA and B, with elements of the representation
labelled by a pair of indices a and fc,which run by unit steps from —A
to +A and from — B to +B, respectively. More specifically,      a set of
(2A + 1)(2B + 1) operators Q^f that form an (A,B) representation of the
homogeneous Lorentz group satisfies  the commutation relations

 [A, QAJ] = - £ Ji2 QA/b ,               [B, Q$]   = -
                                                            £ JjJ>Q%   , (25.2.3)
               d                                             b'
30                        25 Supersymmetry Algebras

where J(y)is the spin three-vectormatrix for angular momentum               j:
                   = S0,s±ly/VTa)(j±°         + l),                   = W        •
     (Aj) ± Uf)                                            (Aj))afa
                                                                            (25.2.4)
From Eq. (25.2.4),itfollows that*

                                 =                         •                (25.2.5)
                    -(jw)*,g         {-\)G'-G(3{j))_G,_a
Thus if QJa are a set of operators that transform according to the spin
j representation of the rotation group, then so are {—\y~°QJla. Also,
Eq. (25.2.1) shows that A* = B. By taking Hermitian adjoints in
                                                    *
Eq. (25.2.3),we see that the Hermitian adjoint Q^f of operators that
transform according to the (A,B) representation of the homogeneous
Lorentz group are relatedby a similaritytransformation to operators Q^
that transform according to the (B,A) representation:
                            = (-l)A~a (-I)*"*
                     QT                         Q-i-a •                     (25.2.6)

  The Haag-Lopuszanski-Sohnius     theorem1 statesin part that the fermion
symmetry generators  can  only belong to the (0,1/2) and (1/2,0)
         As we have seen, the Hermitian adjoint of a (0,1/2) or (1/2,0)
representations.
operator is a linearcombination respectivelyof (1/2,0) or (0,1/2)
     so the complete set of fermionic symmetry operators may be divided
operators,
into (0,1/2) generators Qar (with the superscript 0± omitted) and their
(1/2,0) Hermitian adjointsQ*r, where a isa spinor index running over the
values +1/2, and r is used to distinguishdifferenttwo-component
      with the same Lorentz transformation properties.** The theorem
generators
furtherstatesthat the fermionic generators may be defined so as to satisfy
the anticommutation relations

                           {Qar,Qls} = 2Srs^abPfi,                          (252 J)
                           {Qar , Qbs} = eabZrs ,                           (25.2.8)
where P^ is the four-momentum   operator, the Zrs = —Zsr are bosonic
symmetry generators, and a^ and e are the 2 x 2 matrices (with rows and

 *We usean asteriskfortheHermitianadjointofan operatoror thecomplexconjugate
  of a number.The daggerf willbe usedforthetransposeof thematrixformedfrom
  theHermitianadjoints of operators
                                  or complexconjugatesofnumbers.
**We are
         usingroman insteadofitalic      forthetwo-componentWeyl spinorsQar,
                                   letters
  to distinguish
               them from four-componentDiracspinorsthatwillbe introduced later
                There isa notationdue to van der Waerden, accordingto which a
  in thissection.
  (0,1/2)operatorlikeQ iswrittenwithdottedindices,as Q&, while(1/2,0)operators
  arewrittenwithundottedindices.We willnotusethisnotationhere,but willinstead
           indicate
  explicitly      which two-componentspinorstransformaccordingto the (0,1/2)
                          ofthehomogeneous Lorentzgroup.
  or (1/2,0)representations
                          25.2 Supersymmetry Algebras                        31

columns labelled+1/2, —1/2):

        ffl=               '                        °> =
               (i    o)        ai=\i       o j '           (o     -i)
                                                                        '
                                                                         (25.2.9)
        a° =               '                    •
               {o    i)        e=(-i       o)
Finally,the fermionic generators commute with energy and momentum:
                       [^,QJ     = [P^Q;r]=0,                 (25.2.10)
and the Zrs and Z*s are a set of central charges of this algebra, in the
sense that
          0 = [Zrs,Qat] = [Zrs,Qat] = [Zrs,Ztu] = [Zrs,Ztu]
            = [z;s,Qat] = [z;s,q;j = [z;s,z;j.                          (25.2.11)
  To prove these results,letus startby considering non-vanishing fermionic
symmetry generators that belong to some (A,B) irreduciblerepresentation
of the homogeneous Lorentz group, and that therefore may be labelled
                                                                   — B to
0$, where a and b run by unit steps from —A to +A and from
+B, respectively.As already mentioned, the Hermitian adjoint is related
to operators belonging to the (B,A) representationby Eq. (25.2.6),so the
anticommutator of these operators must take the form
                                           a+b     a+b     c    d
       {QAabB,oft)  = (-i)A-a'(-i)B-b' E           E      E    E
                                         C=\A-B\ D=\A-B\ c=-C d=-D
                          x CAB(Cc;a,-b')CAB(Dd;-a'b)X?dD          ,    (25.2.12)
where CAB(j<r,ab) is the usual Clebsch-Gordan coefficientfor coupling
spins A and B to form spin j, and X£dD is the (c,d)-component of an
operator that transforms according to the (C,D) representation of the
homogeneous Lorentz group. Using the well-known unitarityproperties
of the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients,we may express the operator X£dD in
terms of these anticommutators:

         *SD =       E    E    E     E (-i)w(-i)B-fr'
                    a=-A b=-B a'=-A b'=-B
                    xCAB(Cc;a-b')CAB(Dd;-a'b){Q^B,              Qffi} . (25.2.13)
Not allof these operators are necessarilynon-zero. But the only non-zero
Clebsch-Gordan coefficients   CAB(j<r,ab) for j = a = A + B and j = —a =
A + B are the ones for a = A, b = B and a = —A, b = —B, respectively,
which both have the value unity,so by taking C = D = c = —d = A + B
in Eq. (25.2.13),we find that
                                 = (-D25                    •           (25.2.14)
                    Xiti^f-B               {QX-B, QTb)
32                     25 Supersymmetry Algebras

This cannot vanish unless Q^_B = 0, which would imply (taking
commutatorswith the 'lowering'operators A\ — iAi and 'raising'operators
B\ + iBi) that allthe Q^f vanish. Hence if there are any non-vanishing
(A,B) fermionic generators,then theiranticommutators with theiradjoints
must at leastinvolve non-zero bosonic symmetry generators belonging to
the {A + B, A + B) representation.
  Now, the Coleman-Mandula      theorem tellsus that the bosonic
    generators consist of the (1/2,1/2) generators P^ of translations,the
symmetry
(1,0)+ (0,1) generators J^ of proper Lorentz transformations, and
      the (0,0) generators Ta of various internal symmetries. (Recall that
perhaps
symmetric tracelesstensors of rank N transform according to the
       (N/2, N/2), antisymmetric tensors of rank 2 transform according
representation
to the representation(1,0)+ (0,1),while Dirac fieldstransform according
to the representation (1/2,0) + (0,1/2).) Hence the fermionic symmetry
generators can only belong to representations (A,B) with A + B < 1/2.
These operators turn bosons into fermions and vice-versa,so they cannot
be scalars,leaving only the (1/2,0) and (0,1/2) representations,as was to
be shown. Labelling the linearlyindependent (0,1/2) fermionic
generators
     as Qar, the anticommutator {Qar,Q£s} belongs to the representation
(0,1/2) x (1/2,0) = (1/2,1/2), and thereforemust be proportional to the
only (1/2,1/2) bosonic symmetry generator, the momentum        four-vector
P^ Lorentz invariance dictatesthat the form of thisrelationmust be

                        {Qar,Qls} = 2Nrs^abPfl,                  (25.2.15)

where Nrs is a numerical matrix.
  To see this,we use the isomorphism of the Lorentz group (or more
properly itscovering group) with the group 5L(2, C) of two-dimensional
unimodular complex matrices A, discussed in Section 2.7.The effectof a
Lorentz transformation A^v on the (0,1/2) fermionic generators is

                     U-\A)   Qar 17(A) = £ XabQbr,               (25.2.16)
                                          b

where A isthe Lorentz transformation defined by

                             A(j|lAt= AVv.                       (25.2.17)

We can check that Eq. (25.2.16)applies for (0,1/2) operators by noting
that for an infinitesimalLorentz transformation A^v = <5^v+ oA with
co^ = —a>Vfl,Eq. (25.2.17)is satisfiedfor

                     ^ = 1 + 5 I 5 *CijkCDij
                                          + CDko]Gk ,
                       25.2 Supersymmetry Algebras                        33

while1"
                                                   - icoioKi.
           [/(A) = 1 + \ ico^ J^v = 1 + \ i€ijk(OijJk
(Repeated latinindices i,j, k are summed over values 1,2,3.) In this
case, by equating the coefficientsof a>ijand (d® in Eq. (25.2.16),we find
that

     [J, QJ = -*5>«*Q6          ,           [K, QJ = -\i 5>«*Q*       ,
                  b                                       b
or, equivalently,
               [B, QJ = - J J^Qa        ,         [A, QJ = 0 ,
                             b
which shows that an operator satisfyingEq. (25.2.16)belongs to the (0,1/2)
representation.Now, the a^ form a complete set of 2 x 2 matrices, so we
can put the anticommutator {Qar, Q*bs} in the form Nfs (c^ab, where N1*
is some matrix of operators. Eqs. (25.2.16)and (25.2.17)show that these
operators are four-vectors,in the sense that U~l(A)NflU(A) = A^v iVv,and
so by the Coleman-Mandula      theorem they must be proportional to P*4,
the only four-vectorof bosonic symmetry operators.SettingNj?s= 2P^Nrs
then gives Eq. (25.2.15).
   Now we will apply a linear transformation to the Qar, to put their
anticommutators in the form (25.2.7). For this purpose, we need to
establishthat the matrix Nrs is Hermitian and positive-definite.That
it is Hermitian follows immediately by taking the Hermitian adjoint
of Eq. (25.2.15). To see that it is positive-definite, recallthat the Qar
are taken linearlyindependent, so for any non-zero linear combination
Q = ^2rda crQar there must be some state |*F)that Q does not annihilate.
Taking the expectation value of Eq. (25.2.15)in thisstate implies that
          2W                W                =        Q*} W   > 0•
               E <bPMb              E CrC'sNrs «Q,
                ab                   rs
This shows immediately that ^rscrc*Nrs cannot vanish for any cr that
are not allzero, so Nrs iseither positive-definite
                                                 or negative-definite.
                                                                     The
operator ^ati^f^abP^dadl is positive on the space of physical stateswith
—P^Pfi > 0 and P° > 0, so the matrix Nrs must be positive-definite.^

 Here Kt isdefinedas Ji0.
                        Therewas a mistakeinthefirst             ofVolume I:
                                                     two printings
 Ki was definedas Ji0in Sections
                               2.4,3.3,and 3.5,but as Ji0inSections5.6and 5.9,
 withA and B throughoutgivenby Eq.(25.2.1).
 Thisargumentmay be turnedaround.Assuming a supersymmetrywithNrs positive-
         as in Eq. (25.2.7),
 definite,                we can deducethatP° > 0 forallstates.2However,this
 conclusionisnotvalidwhen gravitationistakenintoaccount,and unlessgravitation
 istakenintoaccounta shiftin the energyof allstatesby thesame amount would
 haveno physical effects.
34                       25 Supersymmetry Algebras

     We may now define new fermionic generators

                            Qar — Z^ Nrs        Qas ,
                                   s
for which the anticommutators take the form
                                    =
                          {Q'ar,Q'b's} 2Srs^abP,.
From now on we shallassume that the fermionic generators are defined
in this way, and drop the primes, so that Eq. (25.2.7)is satisfied.
  Next we must show that the Qar commute with the momentum          four-
vector P^ The commutator of a (1/2,1/2) operator likeP^ with a (0,1/2)
operator like Q can only be a (1/2,0) or (1/2,1) operator, but we have
seen that there are no (1/2,1) symmetry generators, so the commutator
of P^ with Q can only be proportional to the (1/2,0) symmetry generator
Q*. Lorentz invariance requires thisrelationto take the form

                         \Jtab,QcA = £       eacKrs Ql,               (25.2.18)
                                         s
where K isa numerical matrix, and M          is the matrix of operators

                                M^GyP*.                               (25.2.19)

(The matrix eac is the Clebsch-Gordan coefficientfor coupling two spins
1/2 to give zero spin.)It is straightforward then to calculatethat

       MLi_i,   MLi_i,                   = -4M0_i_i(KK%          .    (25.2.20)
                          {Qir, Qis}]]

Using Eq. (25.2.7),the left-hand side is a linearcombination of multiple
commutators [P^,[Pv,^]], allof which vanish, while (^)_i/2-i/2 is
     for generic momenta, so KK^ = 0, and therefore K = 0, which
nonzero
with Eq. (25.2.18)shows that [P^QaA = 0. The complex conjugate gives
[P„Q*ar]=0.
   Now we can take up the anticommutator of two Qs. The anticommu-
tator of two (0,1/2) symmetry generators must be a linearcombination
of (0,1) and (0,0) symmetry generators. The Coleman-Mandula    theorem
tellsus that the only (0,1) symmetry generators are linearcombinations
of the generators Jvx of proper homogeneous    Lorentz transformations,
but since the Qs commute with P^ so must their anticommutators, and
Eq. (2.4.13)shows that no linearcombination of the Jvx commutes with
Pp. This leavesjust (0,0)operators,which commute with both P^ and J^v.
Lorentz invariance then requiresthe anticommutators of the Qs with each
other to take the form of Eq. (25.2.8).The internal symmetry generators
Zrs are antisymmetric in r and s because the whole expression must be
symmetric under interchange of r and a with s and b, and the matrix eab
is antisymmetric in a and b.
                      25.2 Supersymmetry Algebras                       35

  It now only remains to show that the Zs are central charges. It follows
immediately from Eqs. (25.2.8)and (25.2.10)that
                               [P„,Zrs]=0.                       (25.2.21)
Next consider the generalized Jacobi identity(25.1.5)involving two Qs
and a Q*:
      0 = [{Qar,Qbs} , Q;] + [{Q*s,Q*ct},Qar] + [{(&, Qar} ,Qbs] •

Eqs. (25.2.7)and (25.2.10)show that the second and third terms vanish,
so

                               [Zrs,Qc\]=0.                      (25.2.22)
Finally,consider the generalized Jacobi identityfor a Z, a Q, and a Q*:
      0 = -[Zrs, {Qat,Q*bu}]+ {Q;M, [Zrs,Qat]} - {Qat, [Q;M,Zrs]} .
The firstand third terms vanish because of Eqs. (25.2.21)and (25.2.22),
respectively,so we are leftwith the second term
                           {Qta,[Zr,,Q*]}=0.                     (25.2.23)
Now, [Zrs,Qat] is a (0,1/2) symmetry     generator, so it must be a linear
combination of the Qs:

                          [Zrs,Qat] = > MrstuQm-                 (25.2.24)
                                       u
Eq. (25.2.23)then reads
                              <F%,PpMrstu= 0,
for alla, b, r,s,r,and u. Since the operator (T^P^ isnot zero, we conclude
that Mrstu = 0, so that

                               [Zrs,Qat] =0.                     (25.2.25)
Using the anticommutation relation(25.2.8)and itsadjoint together with
the commutation relations(25.2.22)and (25.2.25)and their adjoints then
gives
                [zrs,ztu] = [zrs,z;j = [z;s,z;j = o,          (25.2.26)
which finishesthe proof of Eq. (25.2.11),and with it the proof of the
Haag-Lopuszanski-Sohnius      theorem.
  Of course, the factthat the Zrs are centralcharges of the supersymmetry
algebra does not ruleout the possibilitythat there may be other Abelian or
non-Abelian internal symmetries. Let Ta span the complete Lie algebra
of bosonic internal symmetries. Then [Ta, Qar] is a (0,1/2) symmetry
generator, so itmust be a linearcombination of the Qs:
                       [TA , Qar] = - Yl^rsQas     .              (25.2.27)
36                    25 Supersymmetry Algebras

From the Jacobi identityfor two Ts and a Q, we learn that the tA matrices
furnish a representation of the internal symmetry algebra

                         [tA,tB] = iJ2CABtc,                    (25.2.28)
                                     c
where the coefficientsC%B are the structure constants of the internal
symmetry algebra
                        [TA,TB] = iJ2C%BTc-                     (25.2.29)
                                    c
The Zrs will then be central charges not only of the superalgebra
       of the <Js,Q*s, P^, Zs, and Z*s, but also of the larger symmetry
consisting
superalgebra that in addition contains allthe 7^. To see this,note from
Eqs. (25.2.27)and (25.2.8)that
               [Ta, Zrs] = — 2^(^)rr/Zr/s— zl^tA^ss'Zr^'
                              r'            s'
so the Zrs form an invariantAbelian subalgebra of the whole bosonic
symmetry algebra. But recall that in proving the Coleman-Mandula
theorem we found that the complete Lie algebra of internal bosonic
symmetries, which in our case is spanned by the 7^, is isomorphic to
a direct sum of a compact semi-simple Lie algebra and several U(l)
algebras. The only invariant Abelian subalgebras of such a Lie algebra
are spanned by U(l) generators,so the Zrs must be U(l) generators, and
hence commute with allthe 7^.
  Even though the Zs commute with all symmetry generators, they are
not just numbers; they are quantum operators,whose value may vary from
state to state.In fact,the Zs must obviously take the value zero for a
supersymmetric vacuum state,which is annihilated by all supersymmetry
generators, but they need not vanish in general. In Section 27.9 we
will see how the Zs may be calculated in gauge theories with extended
supersymmetry.
  In the absence of central charges, the supersymmetry algebra (25.2.7),
(25.2.8)isinvariant under a group U(N) of internalsymmetries
                           Qar "+ £       VrsQas ,              (25.2.30)
                                      s
with Vrs an N x N unitary (not necessarilyunimodular) matrix. This
is known as R-symmetry. This symmetry may or may not be a good
symmetry of the action,and ifitisthen itmay be violated by anomalies,
or it may be spontaneously broken, or it may be a good symmetry of
nature.
  A supersymmetry algebra where r, s, etc. run over N > 1 values is
known as an N-extended supersymmetry. Where there is just one Q, the
                     25,2 Supersymmetry Algebras                           37

condition Zrs = —Zsr tellsus that the Zs vanish, yielding a simpler form
of the anticommutation relations

                          {Qa,Ql} = 2^abPfl,                          (25.2.31)
                          {Qa,Qb} = 0.                                (25.2.32)
This is known as the case of simple supersymmetry, or N = 1 super-
symmetry. In this case the /^-symmetry transformations are (7(1)phase
transformations

                           Qa^exp(i<p)Qa,                             (25.2.33)
with q> a real phase.
  For several purposes itis convenient to combine the (0,1/2) operators
Qar together with (1/2,0) operators, which according to Eq. (25.2.6)may
be taken as eabQlr,into four-component Majorana spinor generators Qar,
defined as

                                       e®
                            Qr -                 ,                    (25.2.34)
                                   (         )
or more explicitly

        eir=Qlir,     Qlr = -Q\r,       23r = Qir,        Q4r = Q_ 1, ,

This isa Majorana spinor in the sense that

                            Qr = -Msq;           ,

where /?,e, and ys are 4 x 4 matrices that may be written as the 2 x 2
block matrices:


        '-(!D              -(;:)                     Hi-,)-

(The properties of Majorana spinors are reviewed in the appendix to
Chapter 26.) The form (25.2.34)is chosen in accordance with the usual
notation for the four-component Dirac representationof the homogeneous
Lorentz group, in which according to Eq. (5.4.4)the rotation and boost
generators are represented according to Eqs. (5.4.19)and (5.4.20)by
             I   Gt 0                                Gt 0
                 0 Gt              *x -              0 -Gi            (25.2.35)
             2                              ~2
With Eq. (25.2.1),thisshows that the operators A and B act only on the
top two and bottom two components of the Dirac spinor, respectively,
which is why we use the (0,1/2) operators Qar as the bottom rather than
the top components in Eq. (25.2.34).
38                      25 Supersymmetry Algebras

  In this four-component notation, the fundamental anticommutation
relations(25.2.31)and (25.2.32)for simple supersymmetry read

        {Q, Q} = 2            ~e(<Y")Te
                                                    = -2iP,y«   .   (25.2.36)
                     ( ^pfl                     )
Our notation for Dirac matrices isreviewed in the Preface to this volume;
here we need only recallthat




while eaTe = a, eo§e = — oo, and as usual Q = (fift.The presence of
central charges will change this formula in the case of extended super-
symmetry; instead of Eq. (25.2.36),we have

     {Qr , Qs) = ~2i P, y^rs +              K       +  Zrs •    (25.2.38)
                                  {^Y1)       {^Y1)
  The analysis presented here for the case of four spacetime dimensions
willbe repeated, in a somewhat less explicitform, for general spacetime
dimensions in Chapter 32. As we will see there, the supersymmetry
generators always belong to the fundamental spinor representation of the
higher-dimensional Lorentz group, even in theorieswith extended objects
that allow the construction of bosonic symmetry generators other than
those allowed by the Coleman-Mandula     theorem.
                                    * * *
  In theoriesof massless particlesthat are invariant under the conformal
symmetry algebra (24.B.34)-(24.B.35)there are two additional bosonic
symmetry generators D and K^ that can appear on the right-hand side of
the supersymmetry anticommutation relations.These new generators have
the Lorentz transformation propertiesof a scalarand a vector,respectively,
just like Zrs and P^, so once again the fermionic generators must belong
to the fundamental (1/2,0) spinor representation of the Lorentz algebra,
and its Hermitian adjoint, the (0,1/2) representation. It is convenient
to classifyall generators also according to their commutators with the
dilationgenerator D; an operator X issaid to have dimensionality a if

                                 [X,D] = iaX.                       (25.2.39)
Inspection of Eq. (24.B.34) shows that the bosonic symmetry generators
J^v, P^, K^, and D have dimensionalities0, +1, — 1, and 0, respectively.
Also, the generators of any Lie group of internalsymmetries have
         0. The anticommutator of a fermionic generator of dimensionality
dimensionality
a with itsadjoint isa positive-definite
                                      bosonic operator of dimensionality
2a, so since the only positive-definitebosonic symmetry generators are
linearcombinations of the components of P^ and K^ the only fermionic
                      252 Supersymmetry Algebras                       39

symmetry generators have dimensionalities+1/2 and —1/2. The (0,1/2)
fermionic symmetry generators of dimensionality 1/2 and their adjoints
may again be assembled into Majorana spinors Qm, with
                      {Qm ,QsP} = -liPuWafiSrs     ,             (25.2.40)
                       [/VGr«]=0,                                (25.2.41)
                       [D9Q„] = -iiQr*.                          (25.2.42)
(Note that central charges are not allowed here, because their
      would be 0, not +1.) The commutators of the K^ with the Qm
dimensionality
are linearcombinations of Majorana fermionic symmetry generators Q*a,
which Lorentz invariance allows us to write in the form

                         [K^Qr,]   =                          (25.2.43)
                                    i(yfl),pQ*r
(An arbitrary factor on the right-hand side has been absorbed into the
normalization of Qf*. The phase of the right-hand side is chosen so
that Qfp will satisfythe standard realitycondition (26.A.2) for Majorana
spinors.)The Q% have dimensionality +1/2 — 1 = —1/2, so

                          [J>,e&] = +J*e&-                       (25.2.44)
Taking the commutator of Eq. (25.2.43)with Pv and using the commutator
of K* with Pv given by Eq. (24.B.34)gives

                        [P\Qfa     = -Kf)*pQrp.                  (25.2.45)
We see that the Qs and Q*s are paired.By taking the commutator of the
anticommutation relation(25.2.40)with K^ we find the anticommutators
of the Q*s and Qs:

    {Q%, Qsp} = 2iDSrsSaP + 2JfiVSrsf% + Orsd^p + 0'n(ys)ap, (25.2.46)
where f^ = —i[y^, yv]/4,and Ors and 0'rsare Lorentz invariantoperators
of zero dimensionality with

                  Ors = -Osr,              0'rs= +0'sr.          (25.2.47)
Taking the commutator of Eq. (25.2.43)with Kv and using the fact that
[KV9Kfj]= 0, we find that {y^)^[Kx\Qrp] is symmetric in /xand v, which
with a little
            algebra tellsus that
                              [K\Qrp]=0.                         (25.2.48)
Also, taking the commutator   of Eq. (25.2.46)with Kv gives
                                    =                             (25.2.49)
                           c,g#s/?} +2^(/)a^rs.
Finally,taking the commutator of Eq. (25.2.46)with Qty shows that Ors and
Ofrsact as the generators of the /^-symmetry group U(N)9 with the left-and
40                      25 Supersymmetry Algebras

right-handed parts of Qm transforming according to the representations
N and N, respectively,while the P^, K^ and D are [/(iV)-invariant.    The
U(N)  commutation    relationsof these generators with each other and with
other generators together with Eqs. (24.B.34),(24.B.35),(25.2.40)-(25.2.49)
and the commutators of J^ and D with the various generators constitute
the superconformal algebra. One of the outstanding differencesbetween
this algebra and that of ordinary simple or iV-extended supersymmetry
is that the U(N) symmetry is not merely an outer automorphism of the
algebra that may or may not be a symmetry of the action — itis a part
of the superconformal algebra, which therefore must be a symmetry of
any action that is supersymmetric and conformally invariant.


  25.3   Space Inversion Properties of Supersymmetry            Generators

In theoriesthat respect the conservation of parity,the result P~xQarP of
acting on the fermionic symmetry generator Qar with the parity operator
P must also be a fermionic symmetry generator. Since Jt and Kt are
respectivelyeven and odd under space inversion,Eq. (25.2.1)shows that
the effectof acting on A\ with the parity operator is

                              P~1AiP = Bi.                            (25.3.1)
According to Eq. (25.2.3),the definitionof Qar as a (0,1/2) operator
means that

         [Bi,Qar] = - i J2 {°i)afit>r>       ^    >Q"l = ° '          <25'3-2)
                         b
Applying the parity operator yields

 [At, P^P]      = - i                    '       [Bi> P_1Q^P1   = ° > (25-3-3)
                        £ M</~lQ*'P
                         b
so P_1QarP isa (1/2,0) symmetry generator,and thereforemust be a linear
combination of the Q*r. According to Eq. (25.2.6),Lorentz invariance
dictatesthe form of thisrelationas

                         P-1QarP = J20>rseabQls,                      (25.3.4)
                                    bs
where 9 isa numerical matrix, and the matrix e is given by Eq. (25.2.9).
  We can learn something about the properties of the matrix & by
    that Eq. (25.3.4)be consistentwith the fundamental anticommutation
requiring
relation(25.2.7).Eq. (25.3.4)and itsadjoint yield
             P"1 {Qar , Qls}P = E 9* e<«&***e*d {Qct > Qdu} .
                                cdtu
        25.3 Space Inversion Propertiesof Supersymmetry Generators      41

                     thisbecomes
InsertingEq. (25.2.7),
                                  =
               8rs^abP_1^P            £ &n eacKu ebdStutfcP, .
                                      cdtu
But eaje'1 = -Oi and ecr^e'1 = +<70,while P^P/P = -Pt and P_1P0P =
Po, so thisreduces to the statement that 3 is unitary
                                      0>0* = 1.                    (25.3.5)
  The matrix & is to some extent arbitrary, because for any set of
fermionic generators Qar that satisfies
                                      Eqs. (25.3.2)and (25.2.7),we
      another set Q'ar that also satisfiesEqs. (25.3.2)and (25.2.7)by a
construct
unitary transformation

                    Qar = E       *» Qas ,        &   = VX   ,     (25.3.6)
                              s
so that the parity transformation rule (25.3.4)becomes

                        P_1QarP = £^^Q£>                           (25.3.7)
                                   bs
where
                       & = <%0>qi-x* = m&q/1.                      (25.3.8)
  For simple supersymmetry 3 isjust a 1 x 1 phase factor,and Eq. (25.3.4)
reads

                         P_1QaP = ^E^Q^-                           <25-3-9)
                                     b
Combining    thiswith itsadjoint gives

                              P-2QaP2      = -Qa,                (25.3.10)

independently of the value chosen for the phase factor &. This has the
strikingconsequence that ifa boson in a supermultiplet of particleshas a
real intrinsicparity,then the fermions obtained by acting on this boson
statewith Qa have imaginary intrinsicparities.
  Because for simple supersymmetry % and 3 are just phase factors,itis
obvious from Eq. (25.3.8)that by a suitablechoice of %, the phase factor
9? can be made anything we like.Itwillbe convenient to choose 0? = +i,
so that Eq. (25.3.7)takes the simple form (now dropping primes)

                          P-1QaP = iJ2e«i>(¥b-                   (25.3.11)
                                     b
Just as for spinor fieldoperators, the representation of space inversion is
simpler ifwe combine the (0,1/2) operators Qa and the (1/2,0) operators
^2b eabQl int0 the four-component Dirac spinor generator Qa defined by
42                    25 Supersymmetry Algebras

Eq. (25.2.34).In these terms, Eq. (25.3.11)and itsadjoint read

                            p-1QP       = ij?Q.                     (25.3.12)
(We are using the notation for Dirac matrices given in Section 5.4 and in
the Preface to this volume, which gives


                            '-(!J)-
where 1 and 0 are understood as 2 x 2 submatrices.)
  For extended supersymmetry it is not always possible to choose % so
that 9* is diagonal. However, a theorem in matrix algebra (proved in
Appendix C of Chapter 2) shows that itis possible to choose % so that
0? isblock diagonal, in general with some of the matrices on the diagonal
equal to 1 x 1 submatrices that can be chosen equal to i (or any other
phase factors we like),and other submatrices on the diagonal given by
2x2 matrices that can be chosen to have the form
                        /       0        exp(i^) \
                        V expH^o            o    ;'
with various phases <£.Correspondingly, with thischoice of % (and now
dropping primes) the two-component Qs are of two types. The Qs of the
firsttype also satisfyEq. (25.3.11):

                        P^QarP      =                               (25.3.13)
                                        *!><*(&•
                                          b
The two-component Qs of the second type come in pairs,which we will
callQasi and Qas2, with the 5th pair having the parity transformation rule

 p-i Qasl P = j*. ]T eabQ*bs2, P"1 Qas2 P = e-*' ]T eabQ*bsl. (25.3.14)
                   b                              b
In particular,we now have

     P-2Q*siP2 = -e2i(t>*Qasl
                            ,       P-2Q.s2P2 = -e-2i<t>*Qas2.      (25.3.15)
This shows that, unless (j)s= 0 (mod n\ it is not possible to form
supersymmetry generators of the firsttype out of linearcombinations of
extended supersymmetry generators of the second type.
  In terms of the four-component spinors (25.2.34),the effectof the parity
operator on extended supersymmetry generators of the firsttype is
                            P-1QrP      = ipQr,                     (25.3.16)
while for generators of the second type
  P"1 Qs\ P = P 75 exp(iy5<W Qsi,         P"1 Qsi P = P 75 exp(-iy5<W Qsi .
                                                                     (25.3.17)
                 25,4 Massless ParticleSupermultiplets                43

              25.4     Massless Particle Supermultiplets

Supersymmetry requires that the known particles be accompanied in
irreduciblerepresentations of the supersymmetry algebra by 'sparticles':
bosonic 'squarks' and 'sleptons'accompanying quarks and leptons, and
fermionic 'gauginos'accompanying gauge bosons. None of these sparticles
have been observed, so supersymmetry iscertainlybroken, with the masses
of the sparticlesalmost certainlymuch larger than the quark, lepton, and
gauge boson masses produced by the spontaneous breakdown of the
electroweak 517(2) x (7(1) gauge group, and hence of the same order
of magnitude as the splittingswithin supermultiplets. Thus it is very
likelythat at energy scalesthat are large enough so that we can neglect
supersymmetry breaking and these mass splittings,  we can also treat the
known quarks, leptons, and gauge bosons and their superpartners as
massless. Therefore we will be speciallyinterestedin supermultiplets of
massless particles.
  Consider a statecontaining a singlemassless particlebelonging to some
supermultiplet. We obtain the other states in the same supermultiplet
by applying operators Qar and/or Q*r to this state. Since Qar and
Q*r commute with P^, allthese stateshave the same value of the four-
momentum. We willwork in a Lorentz frame in which the four-momentum
of these statesis p1 = p2 = 0 and p3 = p° = E. With thischoice of four-
momentum, we have

                        = £(<70+ <j3)= 2E
                  a^
                                            ( J   I ) ,          (25.4.1)

which aside from the factorIE isthe projection matrix onto the subspace
with helicity+1/2. The anticommutation relation(25.2.7)thereforeshows
that {Q(_i/2)r>Q(*-i/2)r)8*ves zero when acting on any statein a
         with this momentum,
supermultiplet                  and thus so do Q(_i/2)r and Q(*_i/2)r-
                                                                     We
must therefore construct the statesof the supermultiplet by acting only
with Q(i/2)rand          Furthermore, we are labellingthe Qs with their
                 Q(*i/2)r*
J3 values,in the sense that

                           [h, Qar] =~a    Qar,                  (25.4.2)
so Q(i/2)ranc* Q(*i/2)r
                      respectivelylower and raisethe helicityby 1/2.
  We will firstconsider the case of simple supersymmetry. Consider a
supermultiplet with maximum     helicity/lmax,and let |Amax) be any one-
particlestatewith this helicityand four-momentum    p^. Then

                             Qi|^max)=0,                         (25.4.3)

while acting on thisstatewith Q1/2 gives a state |Amax— 1/2) with helicity
44                     25 Supersymmetry Algebras

^max — 1/2. We willdefine thisstateas

                    |Amax - 1/2) 5= {AE)-1'1 Q i |Amax).          (25.4.4)
The fundamental anticommutation relation (25.2.7)together with Eqs.
(25.4.1)and (25.4.3)shows that this stateis normalized in the same way
as Kmax)

                 Umax - l/2|^max - 1/2) = (Amax|Amax),            (25.4.5)
and in particular this state cannot vanish. Eq. (25.2.32) shows that
     = 0> so acting with              —
Q1/2                     Ch/2 on |Amax 1/2) gives zero:

                Q i|Amax - 1/2) =                       = 0.
                                    (4£)"1/2Q] |Amax)             (25.4.6)

On the other hand, acting with QJ,2 on this state gives the state with
which we started.That is,

   Qi |Amax- 1/2) = (4£)"1/2Qi Qi2 |Amax)= (4£)-1/2{Q; ,Q. }|Amax),
     I                         2                      12
so that Eq. (25.4.1)and the anticommutation relation(25.2.31)yield

                    Qi |Amax - 1/2) = (4£)1/2|^max).              (25.4.7)
Thus the supermultiplet consistsof just two states,with helicities
                                                                 Amax and
AmaX — 1/2. In the basis provided by these two states,the operators Ch/2
and Q\/2 are represented by the matrices


                                                                  <25A8>
        «»-^(!S)-                    4=^(oi)-
while the operators Q_i/2 and Ql1/2 are represented by zero.
  It is worth emphasizing that this is the only kind of massless
          in theories with simple supersymmetry. There are no massless
supermultiplet
particlesthat are not accompanied with a superpartner, and none that
have more than one superpartner. Of course, CPT invariance implies that
                                                          A and A — 1/2
for every supermultiplet of massless particlesof helicities
there must be an antimultipletwith helicities —A + 1/2 and —A. In
        a massless particleand antiparticlewith helicities
particular,                                              +1/2 and —1/2
must be accompanied by a massless particleand antiparticleeither with
helicities+1 and —1 or with helicitiesboth zero.
  How might    the known  quarks, leptons, and gauge bosons fitinto this
picture? We willassume that the supersymmetry generator commutes with
the generators of the 517(3) x 517(2) x 17(1)gauge group.* The quarks

* In
    simplesupersymmetrythe generatorQa must in any casecommute with the
 51/(3)x 51/(2)generators,
                        becausesemi-simple
                                         algebraslike51/(3)x 51/(2)haveno
 non-trivial
           one-dimensional
                         representations.
                  25.4 Massless ParticleSupermultiplets                  45

and leptons belong to differentrepresentations of the gauge group from
the gauge bosons, so they cannot be in the same supermultiplets. We
have to conclude then that in the limitof high energy where 517(2) x (7(1)
symmetry breaking may be neglected,the massless quarks and leptons of
each color and flavorare in supermultipletswith pairs of massless squarks
and sleptons of zero helicityand the same color and flavor,while the
massless gauge bosons are accompanied by massless gauginos of helicity
+1/2 comprising an adjoint representation of 517(3) x 517(2) x (7(1).
  Because gravity existswe know that in addition to the particlesof the
standard model there must also exista massless particleof helicity+2, the
graviton.Massless particleswith helicityX having \X\> 1/2 must couple
at low momentum      to conserved quantities.** Soft massless particlesof
helicity+1 can couple to various internalsymmetry generators,soft
massless
     particlesof helicity+3/2 can couple to the supersymmetry generators
Qa, and a soft particleof helicity+2 can couple to a single conserved
quantity,the momentum     four-vector P^, but there are no conserved
       to which a soft massless particle with |/l|> 2 could couple. We
quantities
conclude that the graviton cannot be in a supermuhiplet with particlesof
helicity+5/2, so itmust be in a supermuhiplet with a massless particle
of helicity+3/2, known as a gravitino,coupled to the supersymmetry
generators themselves.The fieldtheory of thissupermuhiplet isknown as
supergravity,and willbe discussed in Chapter 31.
  Now let us consider the case of extended supersymmetry, with N
supersymmetry generators. We firstnote that because the Q(_i/2)r all
give zero when acting on the statesof a supermuhiplet (including a state
obtained by lettingQ(i/2)s act on anY other state of the multiplet),the
central charges Zrs must also annihilate any state of the multiplet.With
central charges out of the picture,the supersymmetry generators Q(i/2)r
all anticommute when acting on a massless particlesupermuhiplet, so
applying n of them to a one-particlestateof maximum                    and
                                                          helicity/t,max
four-momentum     p^ gives N\/n\(N  —  n)\ one-particle statesof the same
four-momentum     and helicity/lmax— n/2, forming a rank n antisymmetric
tensor representationof the SU(N) /^-symmetry* (25.2.30).The maximum
value of n that gives a non-zero state is n = iV, so the minimum helicity
in a supermuhiplet is given by

                           ^min = ^max-iV/2.                        (25.4.9)
If we wish to exclude massless particle helicitiesA with |A| > 2, then

*•Thisisdiscussedforthecaseof integerhelicityin Section13.1.The argument for
  half-integer     was givenby Grisaruand Pendleton.3
            helicity
 fThe 1/(1)part of U(N) R-symmetry is oftenviolatedby quantum mechanical
  anomalies.
46                    25 Supersymmetry Algebras

>lmax— >lmin^ 4, so extended supersymmetries are allowed only with
iV<8.
   For N = 8, with helicitieswith |/l|> 2 excluded, there is only one
possible supermultiplet,consisting of: 1 graviton with each helicity+2;
8 gravitinos with each helicity+3/2; 28 gauge bosons with each helicity
+1; 56 fermions with each helicity+1/2; and 70 bosons with helicityzero.
   Compare this with the case N = 7, again excluding helicitieswith
|/l|> 2. Here there are two supermultiplets.One supermultiplet contains:
1 graviton with helicity+2; 7 gravitinos with helicity+3/2; 21 gauge
bosons with helicity+1; 35 fermions with helicity+1/2; 35 bosons with
helicityzero; 21 fermions with helicity—1/2; 7 gauge bosons with helicity
—1; and 1 gravitino with helicity—3/2. The other is the CPT-conjugate
supermultiplet,with allhelicitiesreversed.Adding the numbers of particles
in these two supermultiplets,we have 1 graviton with each helicity+2;
7 + 1 = 8 gravitinos with each helicity+3/2; 21 + 7 = 28 gauge bosons
with each helicity+1; 35 + 21 = 56 fermions with each helicity+1/2; and
35 + 35 = 70 bosons with helicityzero. Extended supergravity theories
with N = 8 and N = 1 thus have preciselythe same particlecontent and
are in fact identical.
   On the other hand, extended supergravity theorieswith N < 6 have just
N gravitinos of each helicity+3/2 and are thereforealldistinct.
   For N < 4 there isalso the possibilityof global supersymmetry theories,
theorieswith supermultiplets that do not include gravitons or gravitinos.
For global N = 4 supersymmetry there isjust one supermultiplet,
     1 gauge boson of each helicity+1; 4 fermions of each helicity+1/2;
containing:
and 6 bosons of helicityzero. This is equivalent to the global
       theory with N = 3, which has two supermultiplets:1 supermultiplet
supersymmetry
with one gauge boson of helicity+1, 3 fermions with helicity+1/2; 3
bosons with helicityzero; and 1 fermion with helicity—1/2; and the other
the CPT conjugate supermultiplet with opposite helicities.Adding the
numbers of particlesof each helicityin these two N = 3 supermultiplets
gives the same particlecontent as for N = 4 global supersymmetry. The
gauge fieldtheory with N = 4 supersymmetry has remarkable properties,
which willbe discussed in Section 27.9.
   For N = 2 extended global supersymmetry there are supermultiplets
of two different types, apart from those related by CPT. There are
gauge supermultiplets,each containing one gauge boson of helicity+1,
two fermions of helicity+1/2 forming a doublet under the 517(2) R-
symmetry (25.2.30),and one boson of helicityzero, together with their
CPT-conjugate supermultiplets, with helicitiesreversed. Together each
gauge supermultiplet and itsantimultipletcontain one gauge boson with
each helicity+1, an 517(2) doublet of fermions of each helicity+1/2, and
two 517(2) singletbosons of helicityzero. Then there are hypermultiplets,
                 25.4 Massless ParticleSupermultiplets               47

which contain one fermion of each helicity+1/2 and an SU(2) doublet of
bosons of helicityzero, together with itsCPT-conjugate. (In quantum field
theory a hypermultiplet cannot be itsown antimultiplet,because then the
helicityzero particleswould be described by just two real scalar fields,
which cannot form an 517(2) doublet.) Of course, in the real world there
would also have to be a graviton supermultiplet,containing a graviton
of helicity+2, an 517(2) doublet of gravitinos with helicity+3/2, and
one gauge boson with helicity+1, together with their CPT-conjugates,
with opposite helicity.Gauge theories with N = 2 supersymmetry are
constructed in Section 27.9, and explored non-perturbatively in Section
29.5.


  The particle content of these supermultiplets reveals a difficultyin
incorporating extended supersymmetry in realistictheories of particles
at accessibleenergies. In all cases but one, the helicity+1/2 fermions
belong to supermultiplets along with helicity+1 gauge bosons. Gauge
bosons belong to the adjoint representation of the gauge group, so ifthe
supersymmetry generators are invariant under the gauge group then the
helicity+1/2 fermions must also belong to the adjoint representation,
which is real. This is in conflictwith the fact that the known quarks
and leptons belong to a representation of 517(3) x 517(2) x (7(1)which is
chiral— that is,for which the helicity+1/2 fermions belong to a complex
representation,which is then necessarilydifferentfrom the representation
furnished by their CPT-conjugates, the helicity—1/2 fermions. The one
exception, where helicity+1/2 fermions are not in a supermultiplet with
gauge bosons, isthe N = 2 hypermultiplet discussed above. But in thiscase
particlesof both helicities
                          +1/2 and —1/2 are in the same supermultiplet,
and thereforemust transform the same under any gauge transformations
that leave the supersymmetry generators invariant.They may belong to a
complex representation of this gauge group, but then the CPT-conjugate
of this hypermultiplet belongs to the complex-conjugate representation,
and the fermions of each helicitythen belong to the sum of the two
representations,which is real,again in conflictwith the chiralnature of
the known quarks and leptons.


  In contrast, for simple supersymmetry there are supermultiplets
       just helicity+1/2 and helicityzero, which may be in a complex
containing
representation of the gauge group, distinctfrom the representation
furnished
       by the CPT-conjugate supermultiplet. Here there is no conflict
with chirality.For this reason, most discussions of supersymmetry as a
symmetry that remains unbroken at accessibleenergies have focused on
simple rather than extended supersymmetry.
48                     25 Supersymmetry Algebras

               25.5   Massive   Particle Supermultiplets

Although the known quarks, leptons,and gauge bosons and their super-
partners may probably be treated as massless at energies where super-
symmetry breaking is negligible,this is not necessarily true for other
particles,including the extra gauge bosons of large mass required by
      that unify the strong and electroweak interactions.Also, ever since
theories
the Wess-Zumino     model, massive particletheories have been useful test
cases for studying supersymmetry theories.It willthereforebe worthwhile
for us brieflyto consider the implications of unbroken supersymmetry for
massive particles.
   As in the previous section,we obtain the various one-particlestatesin
a supermultiplet by acting on any one of them with the operators Qar
and Q*r, and allof these stateshave the same four-momentum.       Unlike
the case of zero mass, for mass M > 0 we may now take this to be
the four-momentum     of a particleat rest,with pl = 0 for i = 1,2,3 and
p°  = M. In thisframe   of reference,we have

                            = Af(Jo= Af              .            (25.5.1)
                      (j^
                                          ( J   J)
Thus, acting on any state |) in a supermultiplet with thisfour-momentum,
the anticommutation relation(25.2.7)yields

                      {Qar,Qis}\)=2MSabdrs\).                     (25.5.2)
In contrast with the case of zero mass, here no component of Qar or Q*r
can vanish on the whole multiplet,so we have two sets of raising and
lowering operators: both Q(i/2)rand Q(_i/2)r l°wer the sPin 3-component
by 1/2, while both Q(_i/2)r and Qn/2)r ra*se*^e sP*n 3-component by 1/2.
However, as we shall see, for extended supersymmetry it is possible for
certainlinearcombinations of the Qs and Q*s to vanish.
  We will firstconsider the case of simple supersymmetry. By using
the supersymmetry algebra (25.2.31),(25.2.32),we shall show that the
general massive supermultiplet consists of a particle of spin j +1/2, a
pair of particlesof spin j, and a particleof spin j — 1/2. Where parity is
conserved, the particlesof spin j + 1/2 have equal intrinsicparity,given
by some phase r\,while the two particlesof spin j have parities+irj and
—it].Here j is any integer or half-integergreater than zero. There is also
a collapsed supermultiplet,consisting of two particlesof spin zero and a
particleof spin 1/2. When parity is conserved the particlesof spin zero
have paritiesir\and — wj,where r\isthe parity of the particleof spin 1/2.
  Here isthe proof. We firstshow that any supermultiplet willcontain at
leastone spin multiplet of states \j,a) with spin 3-component a running
by unit steps from —j to +j\ having the specialproperty that,for allsuch
                    25.5 Massive ParticleSupermultiplets                 49

a and for a = +1/2,

                                Q*L/»=0.                            (25.5.3)
Starting with any non-zero state \xp)in the supermultiplet,we can define
non-zero states

               ,v     f (2M)-1/2Q1/2|tp)       Qi/2|V)^0      '
            W)~\        lv>                    Qi/2lv>=o
and

             „>     , (2M)-!/2 Q_1/2 |V')      Q_1/2 |V')^ 0
           'V ;' =~ <                                     = 0
                    \ lv'>
                      '"')                     Q-l/2 M
Because the Qa anticommute, Qi^lv') = 0, and so Qa\tp") = 0 for a =
+1/2. If any state\\p")satisfiesthe condition that Qfl|v>")= 0, then so does
U(R)\\p"),where [/(/?)is the unitary operator representing an arbitrary
spatialrotation.It follows that the statesthat satisfythiscondition may
be decomposed into complete spin multiplets \j,g),satisfyingcondition
(25.5.3).
  Now focus on any one of these spin multiplets satisfyingEq. (25.5.3),
normalized so that

                              {j,o'\j,<T)=60>a.                     (25.5.4)
For j > 0, by applying the spin 1/2 operators* Q* to these stateswe can
construct statesof spin j + 1/2:

 \j± l/2,t7)= -l=J2C^j(j+           1/2,*; a, G-a)Q*a\j,G-a),       (25.5.5)

where Cjj>(j",g";g,g')isthe conventional Clebsch-Gordan coefficientfor
coupling spins j and / with 3-components g and g' to make spin /'
with 3-component g". Using Eqs. (25.5.2)—(25.5.5)
                                                and the orthonormality
properties of the Clebsch-Gordan coefficients, we can show that these
statesare properly normalized:

 (j ± 1/2,g\j ± 1/2,g') = <W    ,      (j ± 1/2,g\j + 1/2,</) = 0 , (25.5.6)
so none of the states \j+ 1/2,cr)can vanish. The only exception is for
j = 0, in which case of course there is no state \j — l/2,o-). We can
also construct other states by applying two Q*s to \j9<r).Since each Q*

* Since                              likea fieldthatdestroysa particle
       Qfl transformsunder rotations                                 of spin
  1/2 and spin 3-component a, itis Q* thattransformslikea fieldthatcreates
  sucha particle,
                and hencetransformslikethe particle      To put thisformally,
                                                    itself.
  Ui,QJ = - ^2b {(Oi)ab
                      Qb,so [Ji,Q;] = ^2b \(a{)ba
                                               Ql which may be compared with
                  propertyofa spin1/2particle,
  thetransformation                           J,\a)= ^2b \(Oi)ba
                                                               1^)-
50                             25 Supersymmetry Algebras

anticommutes with itself,the only such non-zero states are formed by
applying the operator Q1/2QI1/2 = ~Q-i/2Qi/2- This °Perator maY be
written as \eabQ*aQl, which shows that itis rotationallyinvariant,so this
gives a second spin multiplet with spin j:



which is distinguished from \j9a) by the fact that instead of Eq. (25.5.3),
we have

                                     Q;L/>)>=0.                             (25.5.8)
                                 we find that these are also normalized
Again using Eqs. (25.5.2)-(25.5.4),
states:
                   b
                       0',Ah    °? = S*>o,        0".*U   *>b = 0.          (25.5.9)
It isthen easy to show that the statesconstructed so far form a complete
representation of the supersymmetry algebra. The orthonormality
     of the Clebsch-Gordan coefficientsallows us to rewrite Eq. (25.5.5)
property
as

 Q;L/,<t) = yJlM ]TC1/2;(;±l/2,<T            +
                                                  a;a,<r) \j±1/2,(7 +a)
                                                                          . (25.5.10)
                  ±

Also, Eq. (25.5.2)shows that,for any state |) in the supermultiplet,

                        [Q«, QiQlJ      I) = 2Mj2eabQl       I) ,          (25.5.11)
                                                  b
so Eqs. (25.5.7)and (25.5.3)give

     Q«L/>)b   =!>«/>     Q;L/>>
                  b
       = V2M                            l/2,<r+ fc;M)     |;± 1/2,a + b) .(25.5.12)
                "£eab £C,,(./+
                 b     ±
From Eqs. (25.5.2),(25.5.3),and (25.5.5)we have

     Q« |;± 1/2,a) = V2MC,          }(j ± 1/2, a; a, a-a)     \j,a-a),     (25.5.13)

while Eqs. (25.5.5),(25.2.31),and (25.5.7)yield

 Q;L/+1/2,(T> = V^^^C.                                             .
                                        ;(;±l/2,<7;6,(T-&) \j,a-b)* (25.5.14)
                                b

Eqs. (25.5.3),(25.5.8),(25.5.10),and (25.5.12)-(25.5.14)
                                                       give the action of
the Qs and Q*s on allthe statesof the supermultiplet.
                      25.5 Massive ParticleSupermultiplets                    51

  For j = 0 we have the collapsed supermultiplet: Eqs. (25.5.3),(25.5.8),
                                become
(25.5.10),and (25.5.12)-(25.5.14)
        Q«|0,0)=0,                      Q* |0,0)^=0,
        Q;|0,0) = y/2M\l/2,a),          Q*|0,0)> = V5A?E^«fc|lA6>,
        Q. |l/2,b) = y/mSMO),           O: 11/2,6) = yj2Meat |0,0)>.
                                                                (25.5.15)
  Now   suppose that parity is conserved. Recall that the phase of the
supersymmetry generator may be chosen so that the action of the parity
operator on these generators is given by Eq. (25.3.13).Then Q* acting on
P\j,<r)is a linearcombination of the states PQa\j9<r)9which vanish, and
                                                        itmust simply be
since P\j,<r)has the same rotation properties as \j9<r)b,
proportional  to it

                                 P\h<j) = -r\\ho)* .                     (25.5.16)
Since P is unitary, r\ is a phase factor, with \r\\= 1. A
    argument shows that P\],o)^ is proportional to \j9<r).To find the
corresponding
proportionalitycoefficient,we note that

         PL/»>   =                 Q\   L/»   = -f]{2M)-1 Q_, Q, |y,<j)b
                     (2M)-1PQJ
                 = -f,(2M)-2Q_i                            = -r,\j9a).
                                    5 Q,2 Ql2 Q\ I \j9a)
We can then define statesof spin j


                         \j9a)±=*(\j9a)±i\j9a)>)9                        (25.5.17)

with definiteparity

                             P\j,o)± = ±ir]\j,o)±.                       (25.5.18)
Finally,applying the parityoperator to Eq. (25.5.5)and using Eqs. (25.3.13)
and (25.5.16)gives

P|;+l/2,<7) = -^£c,                 ^

Eq. (25.5.12)and the orthonormality property of the Clebsch-Gordan
coefficients
           then yield
                         P [/+ 1/2,<t)= >/[/+1/2, <r),                   (25.5.19)
as was to be shown.
  We now turn brieflyto the case of extended supersymmetry, with N
supersymmetry generators. As mentioned in the previous section,there
can be no massless particlewith a non-vanishing eigenvalue for any central
charge. We can go further and show that the eigenvalues of the central
charge operators set a lower bound on the mass of any supermultiplet.
52                         25 Supersymmetry Algebras

Because the centralcharges Zrs and Z*s commute with each other and with
P^, one-particlestatescan be chosen to be eigenstates of allthe central
charges as well as of P^, and because the central charges commute with
the Qar and Q*r, allstatesin a supermultiplet have the same eigenvalues.
  To derive an inequalityrelating the mass M of a supermultiplet and
the eigenvalues of the central charges on this multiplet,we use the anti-
commutation relations(25.2.7)and (25.2.8)to write

                       -                     "
            E { {Qar     E eabUrsQL) > (<Xr E ««*£<**) }
             ar           bs                    ct
                       = SNP° - 2Tr    t/t +       ,              (25.5.20)
                                    (z        UZ^

where Urs is an arbitrary N x N unitary matrix. The left-hand side is
a positive-definiteoperator, so by letting this act on the states of the
supermultiplet at rest,we find


                        M >               t/t +
                               -j-Tr (Z           [/Z*) ,         (25.5.21)

where now Zrs denotes the values of the central charges for the
          of mass M. The polar decomposition theorem tellsus that any
supermultiplet
square  matrix Z may be written as H V, where H is a positiveHermitian
matrix and V is unitary. We can obtain a useful inequality(which is in
fact optimal) by setting U = V, in which case Eq. (25.5.21)becomes


                       M >            =           V^tz      .     (25.5.22)
                              ^TrH        ^Tr

States for which M equals the minimum value allowed by this inequality
are known as BPS states,by analogy with the Bogomol'nyi-Prasad-
Sommerfeld magnetic monopole configurations discussed in Section 23.3,
whose mass also equals a lower bound on general monopole masses.
In fact, this is more than an analogy; we will see in Section 27.9 that
the lower bound on monopole masses in gauge theories with extended
supersymmetry is a specialcase of the lower bound (25.5.22).
  As we can see from thisderivation of Eq. (25.5.22),for BPS
      the operator Qar — ^2bseabUrsQbs giyes zero when acting on any state
supermultiplets
of a supermultiplet,so there are only N independent helicity-lowering
operators
        Q(i/2)ranc* only N independent helicity-raising  operators Q(_i/2)r>
just as  in the case  of massless  supermultiplets.  This  leads to smaller
supermultiplets  than would   be found in the general case.
  For instance,for N   =  2 supersymmetry the central charge is given by a
                                 Problems                                53

singlecomplex number**

                                                  ■               w
                         '=(_L              z?)
The inequality(25.5.22)here reads

                              M>|Zi2|/2.                          (25.5.24)
Where   M  = \Zn\/2, the helicitycontents of the massive particlesuper-
multiplets are the same as for those of zero mass: there are gauge
              consisting of one particleof spin 1, an SU(2) K-symmetry
supermultiplets,
doublet of spin 1/2, and one particleof spin 0 (the other helicityzero state
belonging to the spin one particle),
                                   and hypermultiplets,consistingof one
particleof spin 1/2 and an SU(2) K-symmetry doublet of spin 0. These
are sometimes called'short'supermultiplets,to distinguishthem from the
largersupermultiplets encountered when M > \Z\i\/2.


                                 Problems

  1. Find a setof 2 x 2 matrices that form a graded Lie algebra containing
     fermionic as well as bosonic generators.

  2. Following the approach of Haag, Lopuszanski, and Sohnius, derive
     the form of the most general symmetry superalgebra in 2 + 1 space-
     time dimensions. (Hint: With the generators of the Lorentz group
     in 2 + 1 spacetime dimensions labelled A\ = — iJio,Ai = — U20,
     M = hi, the commutation relations of the Poincare algebra are
     [Au ,Aj] = i^eijkAk, so the representations of the homogeneous
     Lorentz group in 2 + 1 spacetime dimensions are labelled with a
     singlepositiveinteger or half-integerA.) Assume that the conditions
     for the Coleman-Mandula    theorem are satisfiedhere.

  3. Suppose that there were no massless particleswith helicitygreater
     than +3/2 or less than —3/2. Find the most general massless
     particlemultiplets for N = 6 extended supersymmetry and (using
     CPT symmetry) N = 5 extended supersymmetry. What does the
     comparison between the particle content you find suggest about
     these two extended supersymmetries?

  4. What are the possibleparitiesof the particlesin the short
           of extended N = 2 supersymmetry?
     supermultiplets

'In some articles
               on N = 2 supersymmetrythecentral
                                              chargeZ iswhat we would call
 Z/2y/2.
54                   25 Supersymmetry Algebras

                             References

 1. R. Haag, J. T Lopuszanski, and M. Sohnius, Nucl. Phys. B88, 257
    (1975). This articleis reprinted in Supersymmetry, S. Ferrara, ed.
    (North Holland/World Scientific, Amsterdam/Singapore,   1987).
2. B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. B89, 535 (1975). This articleis reprinted in
   Supersymmetry, Ref. 1.
3. M. T Grisaru and H. N. Pendleton, Phys. Lett. 67B, 323 (1977).
                                 26


         Supersymmetric                Field   Theories




Now we know the structureof the most general supersymmetry algebras,
and we have seen how to work out the implications of this symmetry for
the particlespectrum. In order to learn what supersymmetry has to say
about particleinteractions,we need to see how to construct
    fieldtheories.
supersymmetric
   Originally the construction of fieldsupermultiplets was done directly,
by a repeated use of the Jacobi identities,much as in the construction of
supermultiplets  of one-particle statesin Sections 25.4 and 25.5. Section
26.1 presents one example of this technique, used here to construct
supermultipletscontaining only scalar and Dirac fields.Fortunately there
is an easier technique, invented by Salam and Strathdee,1 in which
supermultipletsof fieldsare gathered into 'superfields,'which depend on
fermionic coordinates as well as on the usual four coordinates of space-
time. Superfields are introduced in Section 26.2, and used to construct
supersymmetric fieldtheories and to study some of their consequences
in Sections 26.3-26.8. This chapter will be concerned only with N = 1
supersymmetry, where the superfieldformalism has been chieflyuseful.At
the end of the next chapter we will construct theories with iV-extended
supersymmetry by imposing the U(N) K-symmetry on theoriesof N = 1
superfields.


        26.1   Direct Construction of Field Supermultiplets

To illustratethe direct construction of a field supermultiplet, we will
consider fieldsthat can destroy the particlesbelonging to the simplest
supermultiplet of arbitrary mass discussed in Section 25.5: two spinless
particlesand one particleof spin 1/2. We saw in Eq. (25.5.15)that the
one-particle zero spin state |0,0) is annihilated by the supersymmetry
generator Qa but not by Q*, so we would expect the scalarfield<fi(x)
                                                                   that
createsthisparticlefrom the vacuum (which isassumed to be annihilated
by all supersymmetry generators) to commute with Qa but not with Q*.

                                  55
56                     26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

That is,

                                 [Qa, *(*)]= 0,                             (26.1.1)

                       -                       = Ux)
                           *£^[Q;,        </>(*)]        ± 0 .              (26.1.2)
                             b
The antisymmetric 2 x 2 matrix eab (with ^1/2,-1/2= +1) isintroduced here
because it is ^2beabQl that transforms under the homogeneous Lorentz
group according to the (1/2,0) representation. It follows that £a(x) is a
two-component spinor fieldthat also belongs to the (1/2,0) representation
of the homogeneous Lorentz group.*
  From Eqs. (26.1.1)—(26.1.2)and the anticommutation relation(25.2.31),
we find

          {Qb, Q   =                     Qc) >*(*)] = 2i(^)te [Pp, 4>],
                       -i"5>«KQ>>
                           c
and so

                         {Qb, Ux)}      = -2(<r»e)bad,(l>(x).               (26.1.3)
On the other hand, Eq. (26.1.2)and the anticommutation relation(25.2.32)
gives


      c                                                             c
so ^ceac{Ql, Cc} is antisymmetric, and therefore proportional to the
antisymmetric 2x2 matrix eab•

                            i{Ql,Ux)}      = 25ab^(x).                      (26.1.4)
Lorentz invariance requires that the coefficient^(x) is a scalarfield.
  We must now go one step further,and calculatethe commutators of the
supersymmetry generators with 2F{x\ Using Eqs. (26.1.4),(26.1.2),and
(25.2.32),we have

     Sat iq: ,^] = kq;     , {qi , Q]    = iiKo:, u      , qu   = - ^   [q; ,^.

By taking a = 6 7^ c, we find that thiscommutator           vanishes:

                                 [Q;,^(x)]=0.                               (26.1.5)

*At this
        pointwe arenot assuminganythingaboutthemassesor interactions    of the
         described
 particles        by thesefields,
                               butitmay be notedthat,as explainedinSection5.9,
 a (1/2,0)freefield                         only of helicity
                   can createmasslessparticles              +1/2, in agreement
 with the result(25.5.15)thatthe masslessspinlessone-particlestate|0,0)thatis
 annihilated                         witha stateof helicity
            by Qa isina supermultiplet                    +1/2.
            26.1 Direct Construction of Field Supermultiplets            57

Finally,using Eqs. (26.1.4),(25.2.31),and (26.1.3),we have

 Sab [Qc ,*] = mc   > {Ql, Ca}] = W{Qc , Ql} , C«] - mi,        {Qc , Ca}]
             = ~
                 °cbdpta + i(^e)ca [Q'b,d^]
             = -
                 ff£dpCa + Yj ebdi^^ca SpCd ■

Contracting with dab,thisbecomes

                     [Qc,«F(x)] = -£<^Ca(x).                       (26.1.6)

                     show that the fields<j>{x),
Eqs. (26.1.1)-(26.1.6)                         C„(x),and &(x) furnish a
complete representation of the supersymmetry algebra.These fieldsare not
Hermitian, so theircomplex conjugates furnish another supermultiplet:

                                                                   (26.1.7)
                     -i^2eab[Qb>       <f(x)] = C*(x),             (26.1.8)
                         b
                     {Q;(CW}       =                               (26.1.9)
                                  2KHfW,
                     -i{Qb,Ca(x)} = 2dabF*(x),                    (26.1.10)
                     [Qc^'(x)]=0,                                 (26.1.11)
                     [Q:,^'(x)] =      ^<3,C(x).                  (26.1.12)

  We can express these commutation and anticommutation relationsas
transformation rulesunder a supersymmetry transformation, which shifts
any bosonic or fermionic fieldoperator &{x) by the infinitesimalamount

                 6(9{x)=    £Kq«+*«q;),0(x)                       (26.1.13)

where ea is an infinitesimalfermionic c-number spinor. (Because ea
and e* anticommute with Qa and Q*, the quantity e*Qa + eaQ*a is anti-
Hermitian, so Eq. (26.1.13)gives (6(9)*= 6(9*.) The commutation and
anticommutation rules (26.1.1)—(26.1.6)
                                      are equivalent to the
transformation
    rules
                    =
              6<j>(x)                                             (26.1.14)
                      -i^2eaeab£b(x)
                          ab
              SUx) = -2j2€*b (^e)ba drfix) - 2iea3F(x),           (26.1.15)
                           b
              6<F(x) = ~J2e'b<a W*)    ■                          (26-1.16)
                          ab
  This may be put into a four-component Dirac notation by introducing
58                  26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

an infinitesimal,Majorana,**         four-component,     spinor transformation
parameter

                          a = -i ( _        €a
                                                 . ) ,                (26.1.17)

so that Eq. (26.1.13)becomes
                                 =
                          id(9(x) [<xQ,(9(x)] .                       (26.1.18)
  The transformation rules (26.1.14)—(26.1.16) and their complex
      may be put into a convenient covariant form by introducing a set
conjugates
of realbosonic fieldsA, B, F, and G, defined by
                    A + iB       ,           F-iG        _            ,„A   4^


and a four-component Majorana         spinor xp,defined by


                               V2V
Let's also recallthe relation between the 4 x 4 Dirac matrices and the
2x2 matrices <xM:




The transformation rulesnow take the form

                 SA = 5 xp ,   SB = — i a 75 xp ,
                 5V = a^M + iysBW* + (F- iy5G)oc,                     (26.1.21)
                 SF = ocy^d^xp ,     <5G = —iocysy^d^xp .

A direct but tedious calculation shows that this transformation leaves

**With the
          phaseconventionwe willbe usinghere,a Majorana four-componentspinor
  isformedfrom a (1/2,0)two-componentspinorua as


                               (-;„-)•
           fits
 Eq.(26.1.17)  t   definition, = —ie.Equivalently,
                 his       withu                a Majorana spinorcan be
 formedfrom a two-component(0,1/2)spinorva as


                                     (-■)
 An exampleisprovidedby Eq.(25.2.34).     ofMajoranaspinorsareconsidered
                                  Properties
 indetail
        intheappendixtothischapter.
                        26.2 General Superfields                     59

invariantthe action



                + i(F2 + G2) + m [FA + GB-   ifptp]
                + g      +     + 2GAB  - ip(A + iy5B)xp]} .
                    [F(A2 B2)                                  (26.1.22)

Eqs. (26.1.21)and (26.1.22)agree with the transformation rules (24.2.8)
and Lagrangian density (24.2.9)found in the originalwork of Wess and
Zumino. In the next three sectionswe willexplore a convenient technique
for checking the supersymmetry of Eq. (26.1.22)and for deriving more
general supersymmetric actions.
  Where the fermion field xp(x) satisfiesthe free-fieldDirac equation
(y^S^+rrijxp= 0, these transformation rulesshow that F+mA    and G + mB
are invariant,and therefore commute with Qa and Q*, and hence also
with P^ This does not prove that F = — mA and G = — mB, but without
changing any of the commutation and anticommutation rules (26.1.1)-
(26.1.6)or transformation rules (26.1.21),we can redefinethe fieldsF and
G by subtractingthe constants F+mA    and B+mG, respectively, so that the
new fieldsF and G are given by F = — mA and G = —mB, and therefore
2F = —m<j>*.This is not true in the presence of interactions,but even in
the interactingcase 2F(x\ F(x), and G(x) are typicallyauxiliaryfieldsthat
can be expressed in terms of the other fieldsof the supermultiplet,as is
the case for the action (26.1.22).



                      26.2   General Superfields

It is straightforward to construct supermultiplets of fieldsby the direct
technique illustratedin the previous section, but in order to construct
supersymmetric actions we also need to know how to multiply field
supermultiplets to make other supermultiplets.A great deal of work can
be saved by using a formalism invented by Salam and Strathdee,1in which
the fieldsin any supermultiplet are assembled into a singlesuperfield.
  Just as the four-momentum    operators P^ are defined as the generators
of translationsof the ordinary spacetime coordinates x^, the four super-
symmetry generators Qa and Q* may be regarded as the generators of
translationsof four fermionic c-number superspace coordinates, which
anticommute with each other and with fermionic fieldsbut commute with
the x^ and allbosonic fields.We aim at constructing Lorentz-invariant
Lagrangiand         so
            ensities,  itwillbe convenient to adopt the four-component
Dirac formalism described in Section 25.2. The supersymmetry
generators
         are gathered into a four-component Majorana spinor Qa, and
60                         26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

correspondingly, the superspace coordinates are gathered into another
four-component Majorana spinor 0a. (Various properties of Majorana
spinors are outlined in the appendix to this chapter.) The
      generators have non-vanishing anticommutators, so we cannot take
supersymmetry
them as simply proportional to the supercoordinate translation
operators
    d/dOa. Instead, Salam and Strathdee found that the supersymmetry
algebra would be satisfiedifwe suppose that the commutator or anticom-
mutator of the supersymmetry generator Q with any bosonic or fermionic
superfieldS(x,9) is

                                         [Q,S} = i&S,                              (26.2.1)
where 1 is the superspace differential
                                     operator

                                  J2 = —-=+/0—.                                    (26.2.2)

(As usual 6 = 0t/?. All derivativeswith respect to fermionic c-number
variables should be understood as /e/t-derivatives,  calculated by moving
the variableto the leftof any expression before differentiating
                                                              with respect
to it.)For Majorana spinors 0 = 6Tyse, with the 4 x 4 matrix e given by
Eq. (26.A.3),so Eq. (26.2.1)may be expressed more explicitlyas

                          a. = _
                               5>«W             w+E      tf,«r-L           ■       <26-2-3>
                                                dOy'^'vexr
Likewise,

            =                        =          -             * y*)h °y        ■   {262A)
        h       E        $y (W ebt                  Ete                   j#
                    y                     ^ r        y
It is straightforward to calculatethat
                                                              d    . „     d
                                                          —                    .   (26.2.5)
                        {la,lp}   =(y5ey"y5e)pa                   +y^—
But Eq. (5.4.35) shows that yj = —^y^~x,          where # is the matrix
<% = — y5e, so both terms on the right-hand side of Eq. (26.2.5)are equal,
and therefore
                                         A_d_                   (26.2.6)
                                  {*.,*,}-21$
                                         dx»
Eqs. (26.2.6)and (26.2.1)together with the generalized Jacobi identities
(25.1.5)show that
     [{Q«, Qp}, S] = {£«,Jp}S             = =
                                  2y^d,S    -2iy^[P,, S] ,     (26.2.7)
in agreement with the anticommutation relation(25.2.36).
  It is often more convenient to express the commutation and anti-
commutation relations(26.2.1)as transformation rulesunder infinitesimal
                            26.2 General Superfields                          61

supersymmetry transformations. Combining Eqs. (26.1.18),(26.2.1),and
(26.2.2)shows that a supersymmetry transformation with infinitesimal
Majorana spinor parameter a changes a superfieldS(x,0) by an amount


                  5s = (olA)s =              +(ay"0)         •            (26.2.8)
                                   -{?%)                 ^


Recall that 3/30 here acts on the leftof any expression. In particular,
where M is any linear combination of the matrices 1, 757^, and 75 for
which 0M0 does not vanish, we have 0'M0" = 0"M0', so


                               -= (0M0) = 2M0    .                        (26.2.9)


  The components of 0 anticommute, so any product of theircomponents
vanishes if two of them are the same component. But 0 has only four
components, so any function of 0 has a power seriesthat terminates with
itsquartic term. Furthermore, as shown in the appendix to thischapter, a
product of two 0s isproportional to a linearcombination of (00),(07^750),
and (0750);a product of three 0s is proportional to (0750)0; and a product
of four 0s is proportional to (0750)2.The most general function of x^ and
0 may thereforebe expressed as


     s(x,0) = c(x)-i(ey5(D(x))
                                     -L(ey5e)M(x)-^(eo)N(x)
              +          75 y, 0) w(x) - t(e 75 e)         +1
                  ^ (0                             (0 [a(x)      Mx)])
              -                      + ±UC(x)\       .                   (26.2.10)
                  l(0750)2^(x)

(The terms \f(o and \UC(x) are separated from A(x) and D(x),
      for laterconvenience.) If S(x,0) is a scalar then C(x), M(x), N{x\
respectively,
and D(x) are scalar (or pseudoscalar) fields;co(x) and k(x) are four-
component spinor fields;and V^x) is a vector field. Also, using the
realityproperties of bilinear products of Majorana fieldsgiven in the
appendix to this chapter, we see that if S(x,0) is real,then C(x), M(x),
N(x), V^{x\ and D(x) are all real, while co(x) and X(x) are Majorana
spinors satisfyingthe phase convention 5* = —fieyss.
  Now we must work out the supersymmetry transformation propertiesof
the component fieldsin Eq. (26.2.10).Applying Eqs. (26.2.8)and (26.2.9)
62                     26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

to the expansion (26.2.10)gives


  w-<v»>|£

        +
             i(<xy5a>)-i(<xy>l0)[ey5-^i)

        +
             i(oLy5e)M-UoLy»d)(ey5d)8M

        +
             mN-±(«yi>d)(dd)^

                            2W         '\ ,J,V ) dx»
        + 2i(oty56)        + i          + i              (a[A +
                                                                  i
                                                                      ?o>])
                  (S[A           M)           (M)
        -iCoy^)                          i           +                        + IDC] .
                      (dys0) (93M[A+         *»])        (0y50) (ay50)[D
We need to put each term in the standard form of Eq. (26.2.10).For this
purpose, we note that: Eq. (26.A.9)gives
               =                                                                         ;
(Stfeyfiysd^a)) -J(00)(a *y5G>)- \(0ysyv6)(* faM-                        H%0)(«     M
Eq. (26.A.16)gives
                         (0/0)00)     = -(ay"y50)(0y50) ;

Eq. (26.A.17)gives
                       WOKhsyvO)       = -(ay"yv0)(0y50) ;

Eq. (26.A.9)gives
(ay50)(0[A+ | *M) = -J(^)(ays[A+              i M)        + K^5T^)(ayM[l+           I *»])

                          -i(M)(a[A+^o)]);
and Eq. (26.A.19) gives
                                 i jM) = - i(a 0y5[A + i 0a>])(0y50)2.
       (ay"0)(0y50)(0^[A +
Using these relationsand rearranging terms in order of increasingnumbers
of 0 factors,we have
      3S = i(ay5(o)+ (a\?C + iy5M + N- iy5f]6)
           -
             \i (06) {ays[k+ M) + \i (OysO) (S[A+ M)
              + \i                     + \i
                     (0y5y"0) (ayMA)        (dysfe) (advco)
              + i                                           + y5(D+
                    (9y5e) (oi[-i?M-y5?N-i?y                              $DC)]0)

              -\i(0y5Q)     (ay5p+iDco])             ,
                             26.2 General Superfields                                       63

or, using the symmetry property (26.A.7),

    8S = i(ay5co)+ (Q[- 0C + iy5M + N-                  iy5f]a)
           -                              + \i
               \i (ee) (ay5[x+ M)              (bso) m+               M)

           + ii                  + {i
                  (0y5/0) (8yMX)      {dysfO) (oidva>)
           + i                                                   + ys(D +
                 (9y5e) (d[i?M -y5?N-               idM Yf                     i°C)]a)

           -\i(0yse)2        {«.y5[$X+ \Ua>\) .
If we now compare this with the terms up to second order in 0 in the
expansion (26.2.10),we find the transformation rules:
                    SC = i (u,ys<o),                                                   (26.2.11)

                    5(o =                          + iy5N+            a,               (26.2.12)
                              (-iy5 0C-M                         Y)
                    <5M =
                             -(a[/l+0tt)]) ,                                           (26.2.13)

                    5N = i
                               (ays [1+ ^ct)M ,                                        (26.2.14)
                         =            +    .                                           (26.2.15)
                   SKM        (ay^)
                                  (adMco)
The terms of third and fourth order in 0 give
                                 - iy5?N +                   +             +           a,
     S[X+\M=          \[-W                 d^ ff                 iy5(D         idc)]
    S[D+   iDC] = i(ay5P+             iDco])
                                               .

Combining the lattertwo transformation rules with the transformation
rules (26.2.11)and (26.2.12)for C and co yieldsmuch simpler
    rulesfor k and D:
transformation


                         Sk=({[d,y,y»]+iy5D\x,                                         (26.2.16)

                      5D =                     .                                       (26.2.17)
                               i(oiy5 0A)
It is to achieve this simplificationthat the terms \ $a> and \UC were
separated from X and D in the expansion (26.2.10).
  The whole point of the superfieldformalism is to simplify the task of
making supermultiplets out of other supermultiplets. Given two super-
fieldsSi and S2 that both satisfythe transformation rule (26.2.8),their
product S = S1S2 satisfies
                 SS = [(ocQ),SiS2] = (<5Si)S2+ Si(<5S2)
                    =             +             = (a^)S,                               (26.2.18)
                      ((a^)Si)s2    Si((a^))s2
64                   26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

and is therefore also a superfield. A straightforward calculation using
Eqs. (26.A.7),(26.A.16),(26.A.18),and (26.A.19) gives itscomponents as
  C = CiC2,                                                          (26.2.19)
  co = C\co2 + C2co\ ,                                               (26.2.20)
  M = CiM2 + C2MX + \i{mys
                                 (02) ,                         (26.2.21)
  JV = C1JV2 + C2Nx - 1
                         (mi02) ,                               (26.2.22)

  W = dv£ + c2v[ -                                              (26.2.23)
                        ^(rniysy^on),
  k = dh + C2kx   -             -
                     ^(oid^         {y^andpCi + \i fiy5 (o2+ \i fiys ©1
              -
       + £(Ni iysMi)co2 + \{N2    -  iy5M2)o>i ,                (26.2.24)
  D = -^Ci d"C2 + CXD2 + C2/)i + MiM2 + N1JV2
                          -          + 1        -
                +
       -(©I [A2 \ Ml)        (^2 [Ai     «)       V^Vi .        (26.2.25)
It is trivialthat linearcombinations of superfieldsare superfields,in the
same sense, and that spacetime derivativesand complex conjugates of
superfieldsare superfields.But multiplying a superfieldby some function
of 0 or differentiatingit with respect to 0 does not in general yield a
superfield.(For instance,0 itselfis evidently not a superfield,because 0
is a fermionic c-number and thereforecommutes with aQ, while 210 ^ 0.)
There is,however, a way of combining a derivativeof a superfieldwith
respect to 0 and multiplying it by a factor 0 which does yield another
superfield.
                                     operator ^a defined by
  Consider the superspace differential

                             Qs = --=-fQ—,                           (26.2.26)
                                    d9          dxP
or more explicitly




The only differencebetween the definitionsof 9) and 21isa change of sign
of the terms involving the spacetime derivative.In consequence of this
change of sign,in the anticommutator of Sfp with i!a,instead of getting
two equal terms likethose in Eq. (26.2.5)with the same sign,we get them
with opposite signs,so that they cancel:

                                   {%,   J2a}= 0.                     (26.2.28)
Since a is fermionic, itfollows that (5L2)commutes      with 3>p, so if S(x,0)
isa superfield,then
            = -i[(aQ), %S]     =               S] = @P(M)S   =
     S@PS                          -i%[(aQ),                     (ot£)®pS ,
                                                                      (26.2.29)
                        26.2 General Superfields                             65

so that 2pS is also a superfield.Thus an arbitrarypolynomial function of
superfieldsS and theirsuperderivatives
                                     &>pS, &>p@yS, etc.isalsoa superfield.
  It is not necessary to add here that in constructing a superfieldout of
other superfieldswe can also include their spacetime derivatives,because
these can be obtained from second superderivatives. Since the only
differencebetween Q)p and 2lp isin the sign of the term involving 3^, the
anticommutators of the 3)s are the same as those of the ,2s,except for a
change of sign:
                                        =                               (26.2.30)
                        {^a,%}              -2ya^A.
  Now   letus consider how to construct a supersymmetric action out of
superfields.There is no such thing as a supersymmetric Lagrangian
     because the anticommutation relation(26.2.6)shows that if<5j§?= 0
density,
then <£ must be a constant. Even ifthe Lagrangian density is not super-
symmetric, the action willstillbe supersymmetric if5 <£(x)isa derivative,
which would not contribute to 5 f <£d4x. In general,the Lagrangian
    J§?can be written as a sum of terms, each of which issome component
density
of a superfieldthat isconstructed out of elementary superfieldsand their
superderivatives.Inspection of the transformation rules(26.2.11)—(26.2.17)
for the individual components shows that in the absence of any special
conditions on a general superfield,the only component of such a super-
fieldwhose variation is a derivativeis the D-component. Also, for the
D-component of any superfieldto be a scalar,the superfielditselfmust be
a scalar.Therefore, unless there are special conditions on the individual
superfieldsfrom which the Lagrangian density is constructed,a
supersymmetric
       action an only be the integralof the D-term of a scalar superfield
A:
                                 =    fd4x[A]D.                         (26.2.31)

But in fact no action of thissort would be physicallysatisfactorywithout
special conditions on the superfieldsfrom which it is constructed. For
a general superfieldS(x,0), the only sort of supersymmetric kinematic
action Iq that is bilinearin S and S* and involves no more than two
derivativesof the component fieldsis of the form

                           70oc                                         (26.2.32)
                                     [d4x[s*s]D.
From Eq. (26.2.25),we see that S* S has the D-component
                  = -d,C* &>C-                        +
         [S*S]D                        i(o>y%co)          i((^o>)/co)
                    +C*D    +
                                 D*C-(o>yl)-(lco)
                    +M*M        + N*N - V* V* .                         (26.2.33)
66                  26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

The terms quadratic in C or co look promising as the kinematic La-
grangians for massless fieldsof spins zero and 1/2; the finalthree terms
are harmless; but the terms involving D or X have the disastrouseffectin
path integralsof constraining C and co to vanish. Fortunately, as we shall
see in the following section,there are constrained superfieldsfrom which
we can construct physically sensible actions. The introduction of these
constrained superfieldswillalso open up ways of constructing
        terms in the action that are not the D-components of functions of
supersymmetric
superfields.
  If parity is conserved, then the space inversion properties of the
        fieldsof a superfield will be related by supersymmetry.
component                                                            To
work out this relation, we apply the parity operator P to the
             ticommutation relation (26.2.1)and use the transformation
commutation/an
property (25.3.16)of supersymmetry generators,which gives

                  ifi[Q, P_1S(x, 9) P} = j2P_1S(x, 9) P .        (26.2.34)
The solution of Eq. (26.2.34)for a scalar superfieldis of the form

                     P_1S(x, 9) P = r\S(APx, -i/S9),            (26.2.35)
where r\is some phase (the intrinsicparity of the superfield)and Apx =
(-x,+x°). (To check that Eq. (26.2.35)satisfiesEq. (26.2.34),note that
Eq. (26.2.35)gives the left-hand side of Eq. (26.2.34)as



in agreement with what Eq. (26.2.35)gives for the right-hand side of
Eq. (26.2.34).)Using the expansion (26.2.10)in Eq. (26.2.35)then gives
the space inversion properties of the component fields:

                    p-1C(x)P   = y/C(APx),
                    P_1co(x) P = —ir\P co(Apx),
                    P_1M(x)P = -^M(APx),
                    P"1 JV(x)P = r\JV(Apx),                      (26.2.36)
                    P-i^(x)P    = -^(ApfvKv(Apx),
                    p-1A(x)P = ifiPA(APx),
                    P_1D(x)P = ^D(Apx).
                                  * * *
  The general real superfieldS involves four real spinlessfieldsC, M, JV,
and D, plus one real four-vectorfieldV^, for a totalof eight independent
bosonic fieldcomponents. For comparison, there are two four-component
Majorana spinor fieldsco and A, also for a total of eight independent
                          26.2 General Superfields                     67

fieldcomponents. The equality of the numbers of independent bosonic
and fermionic fieldcomponents holds in general not only for the
unconstrainedgeneral superfield studied in this section, but also for all
superfieldsobtained from the general superfieldby imposing supersym-
metric constraints,such as the chiral and other constrained superfields
discussed in the next section.
  To see this in general, suppose that we have a representation of the
supersymmetry algebra provided by Nb linearlyindependent realbosonic
fieldoperators bn(x) and Nf linearlyindependent fermionic fieldoperators
fk(x).We willassume that these fieldssatisfyonly non-trivialfield
      so that no linearcombination of the bn or /* with non-vanishing
equations,
coefficientsatisfiesa homogeneous linearfieldequation. Consider a real
supersymmetry generator Q(u), defined as
                                       =                         (26.2.37)
                         Q(u)=(uQ)       (Qu),
where u is some ordinary numerical Majorana spinor (not an anticom-
muting c-number). (For extended supersymmetry, in place of Qa we could
use any one of the Qra, say Qia.) In order for the bn and fk to furnish a
representationof the supersymmetry algebra, we must have
                       [Q(u)9bn] = iY,qnk(d)fk9                   (26.2.38)
                                     k
                      {Q(u),fk}  =                                (26.2.39)
                                   Y,Pkn(d)bn,
                                    n
for some matrix differential
                           operators q(d) and p(d).Taking the anticom-
mutator of Eq. (26.2.38)and the commutator of Eq. (26.2.39)with Q(u)
gives

                  [Q2(u), bn ] = i£ (q(d)p(d))       bm ,         (26.2.40)
                                   m
                  [Q2(u), fk] = i^      (p{d)q{d))jt.             (26.2.41)

The anticommutation relation (25.2.36)or (25.2.38)gives the square of
Q(u) as Q2(u) = — iPp (uy^uj. Hence the square matrices p(d)q(d) and
q(d)p(d) must both be non-singular, because if there were any non-
vanishing coefficientscn(d) or dk(d) for which ^2n cn(d)(q(d)p(d))nm= 0
                       = 0 then bn or fk would satisfythe homogeneous
or ^2k dk(d)(p(d)q(d))kf
linearfieldequations
                             = 0   or                       =0,
        {uy^u)d^cn(d)bn
                  n                      (uy»u)d^dk(d)fk
                                                   k
in contradiction with our assumption that the fieldsdo not satisfysuch
fieldequations. In order for qp to be non-singular we must have Nf > Nb,
68                    26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

and in order for pq to be non-singular we must have Nb > Nf, so we
can conclude that Nb = Nf. Also the square matrices q and p must both
be non-singular, so the complex conjugate of Eq. (26.2.38)tellsus that
/* = q*~xqf, so that the number of independent fermion fieldsis Nf
rather than 2Nf, and isthereforeequal to the number Nb of independent
boson fields,as was to be shown.




                26.3       Chiral and Linear Superfields

In the previous sectionwe found that the presence of D and k components
in a general superfield stood in the way of using such superfieldsin a
physicallysatisfactoryLagrangian density.Suppose then that we consider
a superfieldwith

                                 X = D = 0.                            (26.3.1)

Are these conditions preserved by supersymmetry transformations?
Accordingto Eqs. (26.2.17)and (26.2.16),the condition D = 0 is invariant
ifX = 0, but the condition X = 0 is only invariant ifwe also impose the
condition that d^Vy — dvVfi= 0, which requires that V^ be a pure gauge:

                               Vp(x) = dpZ(x).                         (26.3.2)

Eq. (26.2.15) shows that, with X = 0, this condition is preserved by
a supersymmetry transformation. We have thus arrived at a reduced
superfield,subject to the constraints(26.3.1)and (26.3.2),
                                                         with component
fieldshaving the transformation properties

                  bC = i (a.>>5
                              coJ ,                                    (26.3.3)

                  Sa> = (—iys $C — M + iysN +$Z\         a,            (26.3.4)

                 SM    =             ,                                 (26.3.5)
                           —(a^co)
                 5N = i (otys$(o) ,                                    (26.3.6)
                 SZ = (otoij.                                          (26.3.7)

Comparing with Eq. (26.1.21),we see that this is the same as the su-
permultiplet constructed by direct methods in Section 26.1, with the
identifications

     C = A,   (o = -iy5xp,      M = G,        JV = -F,        Z = B.   (26.3.8)
                     263     Chiral and Linear Superfields                              69

A superfieldsatisfyingthe conditions (26.3.1)and (26.3.2)is said to be
chiral*
  To distinguish a chiral superfieldX(x,9) from the general superfield
S(x,0) of the previous section, we will use A, B, F, G, and xp for its
components, instead of C, M, JV, Z, and co. By using Eqs. (26.3.1),
        and (26.3.8)in Eq. (26.2.10),we find the form of a general chiral
(26.3.2),
superfieldto be

        x(x, e) = a(x) - (e xp(x))+                 f(x) -l-(eys e) gw
                                            \(ee)
                    + l-(e y5 y,               + ±(ey5
                                   e) d»B(x)              e) (ey5 m*))

                    -±(9y50)2nA(x).                                               (26.3.9)

(We could just as well have taken C = —B, co = xp,M = —F, N = —G,
and Z = A. We make the identifications   (26.3.8)because, as we see here,
for a scalar superfieldthey are consistentwith the usual convention that
A and F are scalarswhile B and G are pseudoscalars.)
  The chiralsuperfield(26.3.9)may be further decomposed, as

                      X(x, 9) = -J= [<D(x,9) + 0(x, 9)] ,                        (26.3.10)

where

O(x,0) = 0(x) - j2(9xpL(x)) +n*)(o                                   +
                                                (1~Y1)      *)           ^(^57^)^0(x)
                                        "                                        (26.3.11)
          -;4(M)           (9 MX*))         l(0ys0)2n<Kx),

       = #(x) -
<f>(x,0)                           +                                 "
                V2(^R(x))              ^(x)(fl (^~)         0)           ^(^57^)3^(x)
                                        -                        ,               (26.3.12)
          +4(0750)         (0 *V*(*))       ^(^50)2nte
with component     fieldsdefined by
          A + iB                 fl+7s\               -     F-iG



* Some authorsuse the term 'chiral'
                                  to describea specialcaseof such superfields,
  introducedbelow,whichareherecalledleft-chiral
                                              or right-chiral.
                                                            Our usehereofthe
  termchiralmay atfirst
                      seem strange,
                                  becauseithasno counterpart  forDiracspinors.
 Any Diracspinoristhesum of Diracspinorsthatareleft-chiral                  in
                                                             and right-chiral,
  thesensethattheyare respectively
                                 proportionalto 1 + y5 and 1 — y5,so no special
  term isneededforsuch sums of Dirac spinors.In contrast,  itis onlysuperfields
  satisfying                    thatcan be expressedas thesum of a left-chiral
                      and (26.3.2)
           Eqs.(26.3.1)
  and a right-chiral
                  superfield.
70                     26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

                                   -              ~
        -r A-iB                 (1   y5\                 F + iG       ,„,„««
        * = —      ,                                                  <2«14>
                          «,-(-JL)„,             '—j5-
The component fieldsof either$or$            furnish complete representations
of the supersymmetry algebra:

                        5xpL = y/ld^ -f *R + y/2& aL ,                (26.3.15)
                        S& =                                          (26.3.16)
                               j2~(<xZ?y>L),
                        8<i>= ^(orVl)    ,                            (26.3.17)


                        dtpR = y/2d^ y" aL + yjl& aR ,                (26.3.18)
                        5SF =                                         (26.3.19)
                               y/2(aK?VR),
                        dj> = J2(w,Vr) ,                              (26.3.20)
where as usual



and likewisefor 0. A superfieldof the form (26.3.11)or (26.3.12)isknown
             or right-chiral,
as left-chiral               respectively.In the specialcase where a chiral
superfieldX(x, 0) is real,itsleft-chiral and right-chiralparts O and O are
complex conjugates,   so that $ =  0*, !F = ^*, and xp is a Majorana field.
However,  if we  do  not  require X(x, 0) to be real then in general there
is no relationbetween O and O; it is even possible that one of the two
vanishes.
   The component fieldsof the superfieldO include two complex bosonic
components <j>and #\ or four independent real bosonic components,
and one Majorana fermion fieldxp,which has four independent fermionic
components. This is another example of the general result,derived at
the end of the previous section, that any set of fieldsthat furnish a
representation of the supersymmetry algebra must have an equal number
of independent bosonic and fermionic components.
   We can use Eqs. (26.A.5),(26.A.17),and (26.A.18)to rewriteEqs. (26.3.11)
and (26.3.12)in a form that clarifies the way that these superfieldsdepend
on 0l and 0r :

        <D(x,0)= </>(*+)- yj2(0lexpL{x+)) +3F{x+)(0le0L)          ,   (26.3.21)


        O(x,0) = #(*_) + y/2(0lcVR(x-j)      -Hx-)(Or€0r)         ,   (26.3.22)
where
                          i
              x% = x* ±       (dysy^) =x»±    (eley^L)
                                                          .           (26.3.23)
                       26.3 Chiral and Linear Superfields             71

The expansions of </>(x+)and $(x_) in powers of x^ — x(j_terminate
with quadratic terms, the expansions of xpl,r(x±) terminate with linear
terms, while the expansions of <^(x+) and #"(x_) terminate at zeroth
order, because all higher terms make contributions in Eqs. (26.3.21)and
(26.3.22)that contain three or more factors of Ol or Or and therefore
vanish. For the same reason, it is easy to see that any superfield that
depends only on Ol and x^_ but not otherwise on Or must take the form
(26.3.21),and any superfield that depends only on Or and x^ but not
otherwise on Ol must take the form (26.3.22).
  We have seen that for a superfield to be left-chiralor right-chiralis
entirelya matter of what the superfieldisallowed to depend on. Itfollows
immediately that any function of left-chiralsuperfields(or of right-chiral
superfields),but not theircomplex conjugates or spacetime derivatives,isa
                    superfield.This can also be shown in a more formal
left-(orright-)chiral
way. Because 0(x, 0) depends on Or only through itsdependence on x+,
and <t>(x,
         0) depends on Ol only through itsdependence on x_, they satisfy
the conditions

                             ^aO       = 0LaO    = O,           (26.3.24)
where 3)r and Q)l are the right-and left-handed parts of the superderiva-
tive (26.2.26):

            ®Ra =             31       =                        (26.3.25)
                      ffl          „       -X>^-</<>a^,

            ®u                9                                 (26.3.26)
                 -m                ,-+X>«^-<v'0R).^,

for which

                            ®r*A       = ®L*y?- = o.

Conversely, if a superfieldO satisfies3)R<b = 0 it is left-chiral,
                                                                 and if it
        Q)l^> = 0 it is right-chiral.Any function /(O) of superfieldsOn
satisfies
that allsatisfySiR(S>n= 0 or allsatisfyQ}L^>n = 0 will satisfyg>Rf(<t>)= 0
or ^l/(^) = 0, and hence be left-chiral                  respectively.But
                                          or right-chiral,
a function of left-chiral
                        and right-chiralsuperfieldsisin general not chiral
at all.
  Using the representation(26.3.21)for left-chiralsuperfieldsmakes iteasy
to work out their multiplicationproperties. For instance, if Q>\ and Q>2
are two left-chiralsuperfields,then theirproduct O = O1O2 isa left-chiral
superfield,with components

                       4> = 4>i4>2,                             (26.3.27)
                      Wl = <t>\W2L+ <t>2W\L,                    (26.3.28)
72                  26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

                   & = <j>i&2+ <j>2&x- {wIl €      •              (26.3.29)
                                              Wil)
  The presence of chiral superfieldsin a theory opens up an additional
possibilityfor constructing supersymmetric actions. Inspection of the
transformation rule (26.3.16)shows that a supersymmetry transformation
changes the #"-term of a left-chiralsuperfieldO by a derivative,so that
the integralof the e^-term of any left-chiral
                                            superfieldis supersymmetric.
Thus we can form a supersymmetric action as



where / and K are any left-chiral    superfieldand general real superfield,
respectively,  formed from  the elementary superfields.
  On what can / and K depend? The function / will be left-chiral        ifit
depends only on left-chiral  elementary superfieldsOn, but not their right-
chiral complex conjugates. On the other hand, the superderivative of a
chiralsuperfieldisnot chiral,so we cannot freelyinclude superderivatives
of the <S>nin /. Itistrue that,acting on a superfieldS that isnot left-chiral
(such as one involving complex conjugates of left-chiralsuperfields),a
pair of right superderivativesgives a left-chiral  superfield,because there
are only two independent right superderivativesand they anticommute:
                                           = 0.
                          0R*(9Rfi9RyS)
However, the ^-term of any function / that is constructed in this way
makes a contribution to the action that is the same as that of a D term
of some other composite superfield.Since the 3)s anticommute, the most
                  superfieldformed by acting on a general superfieldS
general left-chiral
with two @Jrs may be expressed in terms of (3>\e3ij)S. If one of the
          superfieldsin the superpotential isof this form, then since each
left-chiral
Q)R annihilatesallthe other superfieldsin the superpotential,we can write
the whole superpotential as / = {0\eQ}^)\i for some other superfieldh.
Now,

                       (9lc9R)(0lc0R)=-49
so, apart from spacetime derivativesthat do not contribute to the
                                    —
      {0\eQ)R)h is the coefficientof (Q\eQR)/4 in h. But, again apart
action,
from spacetime derivatives,\f]& is the coefficientof (OIcOl) _jn /, so
[(@\€9R)h\p equals the coefficientof -(0]>0l) (Ole0R)/4 = -(6y5e)2/4
in h, and therefore

                     d4x [(@TRe®R)h]F =       [h]D .        (26.3.31)
                   J                    ljd4x
Thus we do not need to include terms in / that depend on left-chiral
                                   — any such terms will be included
superfields of the form 2)Rp2)RyS
                     26.3 Chiral and Linear Superfields                73

in the listof all possible D-terms. When / is expressed as a function
only of elementary left-chiralsuperfieldsand not theirsuperderivativesor
spacetime derivatives,itisknown as the superpotential.
  In contrast,the function K is in general a real scalar function of both
          superfieldsOn and their right-chiralcomplex conjugates O*, as
left-chiral
well as their superderivatives and spacetime derivatives,known as the
Kahler potential.(Any right-chiralsuperfieldis the complex conjugate of
a left-chiralsuperfield,so there is no loss of generality in supposing K
to depend only on left-chiralsuperfieldsand their complex conjugates.)
However, not allKs obtained in this way will yield distinctactions. For
one thing,chiral superfieldshave no D-terms, so two Ks that differby a
chiralsuperfieldmake the same contribution to the action.
  It isalso possible to change the form of K without changing the action
by a partialintegrationin superspace. The D-term of the superderivative
^aS of an arbitrarysuperfieldmakes no contribution to the action because

                             fd4x[@aS]D    = 0.                  (26.3.32)

To see this,recallthat




Since S isa polynomial at most of fourth order in 0, the firstterm in ^aS
is a polynomial in 0 at most of third order and thereforecannot have a
non-zero D-term that is not a derivative,while the second term is also a
spacetime derivative,so that itsD-term isalso a spacetime derivative,and
thereforeneither the firstnor the second terms in SfaS can contribute to
the integralin Eq. (26.3.32).                                           so
                            Also, the superderivativeacts distributively,
itfollows from Eq. (26.3.32)that we can integrateby parts in superspace:
for any two bosonic superfieldsSi and Sk,

                   / d4x [Si^aS2]z>=           [Si^Sih       •   (26.3.33)
                                       -[d4x
In Sections 26.4 and 26.8 we willconsider in detailthe case where / and
K depend only on elementary superfields,but not their superderivatives
or ordinary derivatives.
  We saw in the previous section that in theories in which parity is
conserved, the effectof the space inversion operator on a general scalar
superfieldisto subjectitsarguments to the transformations x^ —► (ApYvxv
and 0 -► — i/?0,and perhaps to multiply the superfieldby a phase r\.Under
these transformations, the arguments x\ in Eqs. (26.3.21)and (26.3.22)
are changed by

           x»±
                 - (Apxr   ± i (dpysy»po) = (APxTr       ,       (26.3.34)
74                 26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

while Ql —► — iPOr and Or —► — i/?0l- Thus space inversion takes left-
chiral superfieldsinto right-chiralsuperfields,and vice-versa. The only
right-handed scalar superfield whose component fieldsinvolve creation
and annihilation operators for the same particlesthat are created and
destroyed by a left-handed scalar superfieldO isO oc O*, so P_1OP must
be proportional to O*. By a suitablechoice of phase of O, we can arrange
that thistransformation rule reads

                     p-'dKx, 6) P = 0*(APx, -ip0).              (26.3.35)
In terms of component    fields,thistransformation is

                        P-1(/>(x)P= ^(Apx),
                        P"Vl(x) P = -iey5pxpl(APx),             (26.3.36)
                        p-1jF(x)P = J*r*(Apx).
  There isanother type of possiblesymmetry, known as R-symmetry, that
is important in some models of spontaneous supersymmetry breaking
discussed in Section 26.5, and that will also be used in proving no-
renormalization theorems in Section 27.6.As mentioned in Section 25.2,in
theoriesof simple N=l supersymmetry an K-symmetry isinvariance under
a U(l) transformation under which the left-handed components of the
supersymmetry generator (calledQa in Section 25.2)carry a non-vanishing
quantum number, say — 1, in which case their adjoints,the right-handed
components of the supersymmetry generator carry the opposite quantum
number +1. Inspection of Eq. (26.2.2) shows that the 0 superspace
coordinate has a non-trivialtransformation property under K-symmetry
transformations: Ql carries K-quantum number +1 and 0r, which is
proportional to 0*L,carriesR quantum number —1. In addition,the whole
superfieldmay be given an R quantum number. If we give a left-chiral
superfieldO the R quantum number R&, then itsscalar component <j>has
the same R quantum number, while the left-handed spinor component
xpL has Rw = R& — 1, and the auxiliary field& has R& = R& — 2. In
particular,in order for the superpotential term / d4x \f]$?to conserve /?,
the superpotential itselfmust have Rf = +2, so if/ depends on a single
          superfieldO, then itmust be proportional to O2/**. To put this
left-chiral
another way, iff(<S>)isa pure mass term proportional to O2 then we must
choose R&   =  +1, while if /(O) is a pure interaction term proportional
to O3, then we must choose R& = 2/3. On the other hand, inspection
of Eq. (26.2.10)shows that the D-term of a superfield has the same R
value as the superfield,so in order for the term / d4x[g]o in the action to
conserve R itis only necessary that K have R = 0, which willbe the case
ifeach term in K contains equal numbers of O and O* factors,whatever R
value we give to O. Of course, there isno general reason why K-symmetry
           26A Renormalizable Theories of Chiral Superfields           75

should be respected by the action,or why itshould not be spontaneously
broken.
                                    * * *
  There are other ways of constraining superfields,to yield other types
of supermultiplets of fields. Among    the more common    are the linear
superfields.To learn the conditions defining this sort of superfield,we
note that ifS isa general superfield,then we can form a chiral superfield

                            S' =                                 (26.3.37)
                                    U@g>)s.
This isa chiralsuperfieldbecause itcan be written as a sum of \{Q)l @l) S,
which is right-chiral,
                     and \(@r@r)S9 which isleft-chiral.   Its components
are given in terms of the components of 5 by
                                C' = N,                          (26.3.38)
                                co'= X + $co,                    (26.3.39)
                             M' = -dMK"  ,                       (26.3.40)
                             N'  = D + DC ,                      (26.3.41)
                                 = -d^M,                         (26.3.42)
                             k;
                              X' = D' = 0 .                      (26.3.43)
A multiplet S is said to be linearif the superfieldS' defined in this way
vanishes
                                            = 09                 (26.3.44)
                                (99)S
or in terms of itscomponents,
        N = M = dfiV>i= 0,        X = -$(D,        D = -DC.      (26.3.45)
This leaves four independent bosonic fields,C and the three components
of Vp subject to the condition d^V^ = 0, and four independent fermionic
fields,the components of the Majorana four-spinor co. We will see in
Section 26.6 that the current superfields,whose F^-terms are the conserved
currents associatedwith symmetry transformations, are linear superfields.


        26.4   Renormalizable      Theories of Chiral Superfields

We will now work out the detailsof a general renormalizable theory of
scalar chiral superfields.This will provide some insight into the
implications
        of supersymmetry, and the theory we obtain will be part of the
supersymmetric standard model to be discussed in Chapter 28.
  As discussed in Section 12.2,the Lagrangian density in a renormalizable
theory can contain only operators with dimensionality (counting powers
76                   26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

of energy or momentum,    with H = c = 1) four or less.Eq. (26.2.6)shows
that ,2aand hence d/d0a has dimensionality 1/2, so ^a has dimensionality
+1/2, and 0a has dimensionality —1/2. The #"- and D-terms of a superfield
S are the coefficientsof two or four factors of 0, respectively,so if
the superfield has dimensionality d(S) then its ^- and D-terms have
dimensionalities d(^s) = d(S) + 1 and d(Ds) = d(S) + 2. Thus in a
renormalizable theory the functions / and K in Eq. (26.3.30)consist of
operators with dimensionality at most three and two, respectively.
  The dimensionality of an elementary scalar superfieldOn is that of an
elementary scalar field,or +1, so in order for each term in the function /
to have dimensionality three or less,itcan contain at most three factorsof
On and/or derivativesd/dx^ and/or pairs of spinor superderivatives0a.
As discussed in the previous section,any left-chiralterm in / that involves
superderivativescould be replaced with a term in X, so superderivatives
can be omitted in /. Eq. (26.2.30)shows that spacetime derivativescan
be expressed in terms of superderivatives,so these too can be omitted.
(In any case, Lorentz invariance would rule out terms with one spacetime
derivative,and terms with two derivativesin a renormalizable theory could
involve only one On factor,on which these derivativeswould have to act,
so such terms would not contribute to the action.)We conclude that /(O)
isat most a cubic polynomial in the On, without spacetime derivativesor
superderivatives.
  The same dimensional analysis shows that in a renormalizable theory
K is at most a quadratic function of On and O*, without derivatives.
But any term in K(0,0*) that involves only On or only O* would be
a chiral superfield,and chiral superfieldsby definitionhave no D-terms,
so [K(0,0*)]/> receivescontributions only from terms in K(0,0*) that
involve both On and O*. Thus K(0,0*) must be of the form

                         K(0,0*) = £gnmO;Om,                         (26.4.1)
                                   mn
with constant coefficientsgnm forming a Hermitian matrix.
  We must now calculatethe ^- and D-components of /(O) and X(0,0*),
respectively.To calculatethe D-component of K (0,0*), we note that the
term in 0*Om of fourth order in 0 is

              =
     [<s>:*m]d4 -lihseflti^m+(□*;)*„]
                 +                               +
                     (#75 9) [(tp^e)(0y"3„v>m)       ((WD/fl)   (0 V>«)]
                                                 +
                 +\K*m        (5(1 -y5)0) (0(1       ys)e)

                 -i^;a^w(^57M0)(0757v0).
            26.4 Renormalizable Theories of Chiral Superfields              11

Using (26.A.18) and (26.A.19) allows us to convert the 9 dependence of
thisexpression to an over-allfactor (OysO)2:

                   i          ? r1             1




The iMerm    of a superfield is the coefficientof — \\BysB\         minus   ±D
acting on the ^-independent term, which for 0*Om         is <j>*n<l>m,
                                                                  so


                    =            -d^d^m+K^r^
     1[k(o,o*)]d        $>


                        -T                    + -            / tpmL) . (26.4.2)
                             (^L 7%   VmL)          ^(VwL)

If we write On as a linearcombination J2m NnmQ>'m of new superfields<S>'m,
then K(0, O*) isgiven in terms of the new superfieldsby a formula which is
the same as Eq. (26.4.1), except that gnm is replaced with g'nm= (N^gN)„m.
In order for the kinematic terms for the scalar and spinor fieldsto have
a sign consistent with the quantum commutation and anticommutation
relations,itis necessary that the Hermitian matrix gnm be positive-definite
and, as shown in Section 12.5,thismeans that we can choose N so that
Snm = <W Dropping primes, the term (26.4.2)is now


                   =          -dpWtfrn+^&n
     >*.*•>]„           £


                        -X {vnL 7^            + x (dp(VnL) 7**     . (26.4.3)
                                      XPnLJ                  Wyil)

We can stilluse a unitary transformation to redefine the superfields
without changing the form of Eq. (26.4.3),a freedom we will need to
exerciseshortly.
  The terms in Eq. (26.4.3)involving (f)n
                                        and xpnLare the correctkinematic
Lagrangians for conventionally normalized complex scalarand Majorana
spinor fields.We will rewrite the fermion terms in a more familiar form
afterwe have had a chance to consider mass terms.
  To calculate the <F-term of /(O), it is most convenient to use the
representation(26.3.21)of the superfields,and pick out the term of second
78                   26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

order in 0l :

                      -
      [/(■**.<»)],,        e
                                   («fr^»>)(«fr^*>)^S£lL


                           +
                               ?™®W)
(We have replaced x+ here with x because the term {Q^ey^Qi) in Eq.
(26.3.21)vanishes when multiplied by an expression with two 0l factors.)
The 0 dependence of the firstterm on the right-hand side can be put into
a standard form by using Eq. (26.A.11) to write*
                                                                          +
                               =
     (eIey,nL)(eley,mL)             fa         (I±*)     *) (^       (!       *) WmL)
                               =                                 .
                                    -^{ynL^mL){0leeL^
The #"-term of any left-chiral
                             superfieldis the coefficientof (0JV0l), so
here

      /<*>L—o£                                                                         (26.4.4)

The complete Lagrangian density isthe sum of the terms (26.4.3),(26.4.4),
and the complex conjugate of (26.4.4):

     ^ = E       -W.vb.+r.p.


         —5 (V"i fdp Vul) + j((5,,v>^.)r'v»t)

                                                ~
         -2 £     5ms(**                 **>        2£                        (****)
                                                         las?*:j

                                                                                       (26.4.5)

  The auxiliaryfields<Fn enter quadratically in the action,with constant
coefficientsfor the second-order terms, so they can be eliminated by
setting&n equal to the value at which the Lagrangian density (26.4.5)is
stationary with respect to &n and #"*:

                                                                                       (26.4.6)
                                   '-W

*Note that istheleft-handed
          xp„L           component of y>„,
                                         not tpnL.
           26.4 Renormalizable Theories of Chiral Superfields                  79

Insertingthisin Eq. (26.4.5)gives

    & = 53    ~            - 1/                     +
                 Wn ^^n       2 {vnL 7%     Wnl)j       ^ ((^/jO
                                                                   ?" V>hZ.)

            i     b2M)   (_          x    i„/   a2/(0) \7-               V


                          d-M    .                                      (26.4.7)
                           50n
Thus the scalarfieldpotentialis ¥($) = ]Tn |3/(0)/30n|2.
  With the auxiliaryfieldseliminated in this way, the action is no longer
invariantunder the supersymmetry transformations (26.3.15),(26.3.17)of
the remaining fields\pni and <f>n:



This is because the expression (26.4.6)does not obey the transformation
rule b^n = yj2(aZ@\pni) for &n given by Eq. (26.3.16),but instead




For the same reason, aftereliminating the auxiliaryfieldsthe commutators
of the supersymmetry transformations of (f)nand \pni are no longer given
by the supersymmetry anticommutation relations,and in factdo not form
a closed Lie superalgebra. But thisis not inconsistentwith the existence
of quantum mechanical operators Qa that satisfythe anticommutation
relationsof supersymmetry. These operators generate supersymmetry
transformations, in the sense that the commutator of — i(otQ)with any
Heisenberg-picture quantum field <j)nor \pni equals the change in that
fieldunder a supersymmetry transformation with infinitesimalparameter
a. With ^n given by Eq. (26.4.6)the commutator of — i(aQ) with !Fn
is given by b2Fn — yjli&l fiVnL),because in the Heisenberg picture the
quantum fieldxpni satisfiesthe fieldequation derived from the Lagrangian
(26.4.7):




Likewise, the supersymmetry transformations of the quantum fields0n
and \pni do form a closed Lie superalgebra when the fieldequations are
taken into account. Such algebras are often calledon-shell.
  The zeroth-order expectation values 0„o of the scalar fields<f>nmust
be at the maximum    of the last term in Eq. (26.4.7).Since this term is
always negative or zero, the maximum    will be at spacetime-independent
80                    26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

fieldvalues </>„o
                at which thisterm vanishes, so that

                                dm)            = 0,                  (26.4.8)
                                d(j>n

provided of course that a solution of this equation exists.Eq. (26.4.8)not
                                              —
only maximizes the lastterm in Eq. (26.4.7) itisalso the condition for
supersymmetry to be unbroken. Invariance of the vacuum under super-
symmetry transformations requires that the vacuum expectation value of
the change in any fieldunder a supersymmetry transformation should
vanish. The change in a bosonic fieldisa fermionic field,which of course
has zero expectation value anyway, but Eq. (26.3.15)shows that the
vacuumexpectation value of SipnL is proportional to the vacuum expectation
value of the auxiliaryfield#"n, which thereforemust vanish if
       isunbroken. According to Eq. (26.4.6),
supersymmetry                                   in zeroth-order perturbation
theory  thiscondition  requires that Eq. (26.4.8)must be satisfied.  We will
see in Section 27.6 that if Eq. (26.4.8)is satisfiedthen supersymmetry is
unbroken to allorders of perturbation theory.
   For a singleleft-chiralscalar superfieldO, the fundamental theorem of
algebra tellsus that the polynomial 3/(</>)/3</> always has at leastone zero
somewhere in the complex plane. This is not necessarilytrue when there
is more than one superfield.If we assume that there is a solution </>no   of
Eq. (26.4.8),we can evaluate the physical degrees of freedom of the theory
by setting
                                   = </>nO
                                (f>n     + (pn,                      (26.4.9)
and expanding in powers of (pn.The masses of the particlesof this theory
can be calculated by inspecting the terms of second order in q> and \p:


      ^o = E     -        d^cpn- - (xpnLy^df,xpnLJ + - (^(i/>nL)y" Whl)
                     d„q>*n


                 ^nm (ynL VwL)        ~
           ~2 51                           2 51 -^nm (vnL Wml))
              nm                             nm

           -Y^ijl^Jl)        (p*m(pn,                               (26.4.10)
              nm
where M    isthe symmetric complex matrix




Now    ifwe redefinethe fieldsby a unitary transformation

             (pn= J2 ^nmV'm ,             WnL = £   ^nmWmL   >      (26.4.12)
              26.4 Renormalizable Theories of Chiral Superfields                                 81

then the free-field
                  Lagrangian (26.4.10)willtake the same form, but with
M replaced with M\ where
                                      Jl' = qiJJtm.                                         (26.4.13)
According to a theorem of matrix algebra, for any complex symmetric
matrix M itis always possible to find a unitary matrix °U such that the
matrix Jl' defined by Eq. (26.4.13)is diagonal, with real positiveelements
mn on the diagonal. (For future use, we note that M^M1    = ^Jl^Jl^U, so
the quantitiesml are just the eigenvalues of the positiveHermitian matrix
jftjl.) Redefining the fieldsin this way and dropping the primes, the
quadratic part of the Lagrangian is now

    ^o = E       -             - -                                +
                      d„4»*d>„     (ipnLy%                v>«l)        5 (dn(VnL) f Vta.)

                                          ~~
          ~2 5Zm"       (ynL V"l)              7 2 m" iVnL xpnL)
              n                                   n
                                                                                        (26.4.14)

To put the fermion mass terms in a more familiar form, we introduce
fieldsxpn{x)defined as the Majorana fieldswhose left-handed components
are xpnLi*)-Then, using the symmetry properties (26.A.7) of Majorana
bilinears:

                              +                    ^ Vni)
     ~2 (vJH 7%       Vhl)        2 (^(TO
          =                                           +
               -i^y        (i±^)           a,v>.)         \{imr            (^)          *)



          =
               -2(^7%^),
while the realityproperties(26.A.21) give

                                      = 2 Re                                   =
     \WnL VnL) + \WnL WnL)                        (tfaI               J \pn)       (w Vn)
                                                                                             •

The complete quadratic Lagrangian is then

                     ^o = £           -
                                          d^d11^          -J2m2n<Pn<Pn
                              n   I
                                                      -                                 (26.4.15)
                           ~2 (v» y%            vn)       y   (v» v»)

The factor 1/2 in the fermion terms iscorrectbecause these are Majorana
82                    26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

fermion fields,while there is no factor 1/2 in the scalar terms because
these are complex scalars.We see that the spinlessand spin 1/2 particles
have equal masses mn, as required by the unbroken supersymmetry of the
theory.
   The interactionpart ££' of the Lagrangian density is given by the terms
in Eq. (26.4.7)of higher than second order in (pnand xpn.Since the superpo-
tentialf((t>o
            + (p)is being assumed to be a cubic polynomial and stationary
       =
at (pn 0, with (p defined so that the second-order terms are \ ^2n mnq>l,
we may write the superpotential (apart from an inconsequential constant
term) as

              + (p)= - ^2 mn Vn +
         /(</>0                            (pn<Pm<pt•                          (26.4.16)
                        n         g ^Zfnmt
                                    nmt
Using thisin Eq. (26.4.7)gives the interactionas




                       nmt           \    \       Z      /      /

                -            mn fnmtVnVmVt    ~                m" fn\nt<Pn<Pm<Pt
                    j Ynmt                            ^ Ynmt

                 —a     Y                         .
                             fnmffnmr<Pm(pf(p*m>(p}>                           (26.4.17)
                       nmfm'f'
We  see that a knowledge of the masses mn and the 'Yukawa' couplings
fnmt of the scalarsand fermions is enough to determine allthe cubic and
quartic self-couplingsof the spinlessfields.
  As an illustration, consider the case of a single left-chiralsuperfield.
For comparison with earlierresults,letus write the singlecoefficient/ in
Eq. (26.4.16)as
                              f = 2yj2ei0LX,                     (26.4.18)
where k is real and a is some real phase. We will also introduce a pair
of real spinlessfieldsA(x) and B(x) by writing the singlecomplex scalar
here as



The total Lagrangian density is then given by the sum of Eqs. (26.4.15)
and (26.4.17)as
              <£ = - L2d^A&*A - 1^5           d>*B - im2 (A2 + B2)

                      -jfW^t/))-         im($v>)
               26.5 Spontaneous Supersymmetry Breaking                 83

                   —XA   (tpt/n— \XB (\pys\p\

                   -mXA(A2     + B2)-    \l2{A2 + B2)2 .         (26.4.20)
which is the same as the Lagrangian density (24.2.9)originallyfound by
Wess and Zumino.2 Itisnoteworthy that in thissimple case the Lagrangian
turns out to be invariant under a space inversion transformation

 A(x) -► A(APx),      B(x) -► -B(Apx),        xp(x)-► iPxp(APx), (26.4.21)
even though we did not assume parity conservation in deriving it.The
appearance of parityconservation as an 'accidental'symmetry isa familiar
feature of various renormalizable gauge theories (see Sections 12.5 and
18.7) but not of theories involving spinless fields,so this is a special
consequence of supersymmetry in the renormalizable theory of a single
scalar superfield.



      26.5   Spontaneous     Supersymmetry    Breaking in the Tree
                                  Approximation

We saw in the previous section that supersymmetry is unbroken (at least
in the tree approximation) in renormalizable theoriesof chiralsuperfields
ifEq. (26.4.8)has a solution,that is,ifthere is a value </>oof the fieldsat
which the superpotential/(</>) is stationary:

                              dm)         = 0.                    (26.5.1)
                               d(/)n
There are as many independent variables here as there are equations to
satisfy,so we generally expect there to be solutions of Eq. (26.5.1).In
order for supersymmetry to be spontaneously broken in these theories,it
is necessary to impose restrictionson the form of the superpotential.
   To see how a choice of superpotential may allow supersymmetry to
be spontaneously broken, we willconsider a generalization of a class of
models due to O'Raifeartaigh.3Suppose that the superpotential isa linear
combination of a set Y[ of left-chiral
                                     superfields,with coefficients
                                                                 given by
functions ft(X) of a second set of left-chiral
                                             superfieldsXn:

                           f(X9Y) = Y^Ytft(X).                    (26.5.2)
                                     i
The conditions for supersymmetry to be unbroken by the values xn and
yi of the scalar components of these superfieldsare that


                              dyt
84                  26 Supersymmetric Field Theories




Eq. (26.5.4)can always be solved by taking yt = 0, with no effecton the
problem of solving Eq. (26.5.3).On the other hand, ifthe number of Xn
superfieldsis smaller than the number of Y\ superfields,then Eq. (26.5.3)
imposes more conditions on the xn than there are variables,so without
fine-tuninga solution is impossible, and supersymmetry isbroken.
  It may appear that the initialassumption (26.5.2)itselfrepresents a
radical form of fine-tuning,but in fact this form can be imposed on
the superpotential by assuming a suitable K-symmetry. As discussed in
Section 26.3, in theorieswith N = 1 supersymmetry an K-symmetry is a
U(\) symmetry for which the 0 superspace coordinate has a non-trivial
transformation property. If we assume an K-symmetry for which 0L
carriesquantum number +1, then the ^-term of any superpotential has
a quantum number equal to that of the superpotential itselfminus 2, so
R invariance requires the superpotential itselfto have R = 2. We can
thereforeimpose the structure(26.5.2)by requiring R invariance,with the
Yt and Xn superfieldsgiven R quantum numbers +2 and 0, respectively.
  The scalarfieldsin thissort of model have a potential


                n*,j>) = £l//(*)l2 + £                            (26.5.5)
                                                 dxn

The potential is always minimized by choosing the xn to minimize the
firstterm; whatever values this gives the xn, the second term can always
be minimized by taking yt = 0. Whether or not supersymmetry can be
spontaneously broken, these models have the peculiar feature that there
are always directions in the space of the fieldsin which the minimum
of the potential is flat.Whatever values x„o of the xn minimize the first
term in Eq. (26.5.5),the second term vanishes not only for yt = 0, but
for any vector yt in a direction orthogonal to all the vectors (vn)t=
(dfi(x)/dxn)XSSXo.If there are Nx superfieldsXn and Ny superfields Yt
with Ny > Nx, then the vn cannot span the space of the ys, and there
willbe at least Ny — Nx of these flatdirections.For any non-vanishing
values yt = yot along any one of these flatdirections,the K-symmetry of
the Lagrangian density isspontaneously broken, and the Goldstone boson
field<j>associated with thisglobal symmetry breakdown corresponds to a
term oc yoi in the j;,-.
  The simplest example of this class of models is provided by the case
where there isjust one X superfieldand two Y superfields.Renormaliz-
abilityrequires the coefficientfunctions fi(X) to be quadratic functions of
X, and by taking suitablelinearcombinations of the Y) and shiftingand
               26.5 Spontaneous Supersymmetry Breaking                 85

rescalingX we can choose these functions so that

                 fi(X) = X-a9              f2(X) = X\             (26.5.6)
with an arbitraryconstant a. There clearlyisno simultaneous solution of
the two equations (26.5.1)unless the superpotential is fine-tuned so that
a = 0. The potential(26.5.5)here is

                 V(x,y) = |x|4+ |x - a\2 + \yx+ 2xy2\2 .          (26.5.7)
The sum of the firsttwo terms has a unique global minimum xo. The flat
directionhere is the one for which y\ + 2xoj>2= 0- For a = 0 we have
xo = 0, and the minima of the potential are along the line with y\ = 0
and yi arbitrary.
  Whatever the reason for a spontaneous breakdown of supersymmetry,
this phenomenon    always entails the existence of a massless spin 1/2
particle, the goldstino,analogous to the Goldstone bosons associated
with the spontaneous breakdown of ordinary global symmetries. (The
one exception, discussed in Section 31.3, is that in supergravity theories,
where supersymmetry is a local symmetry, the goldstino appears as the
helicity+1/2 states of a massive particle of spin 3/2, the gravitino.)
In renormalizable theories of chiral superfields,the tree-approximation
vacuum expectation values </>„oof the scalarfieldsmust be at a minimum
of the potential£n \df{<t>)/d<t>n\2
                                 in Eq. (26.4.7),so


                                (d_m             = 0,             (26.5.8)
                                       4>=4>oJ
where

                                                                  (26.5.9)
                                  d(j)nd(l)n

If Eq. (26.5.1)is not satisfied,then Eq. (26.5.8)tellsus that the matrix
Jtnm  has at leastone  eigenvector with eigenvalue zero, so according to
Eq. (26.4.10)there must be at least one linear combination of the spin
1/2 particlesdescribed by xpn with zero mass. For instance,for the model
defined by Eqs. (26.5.2)and (26.5.6),the matrix Jf has the non-vanishing
components

         Mxyx = MyxX = 1 ,        Jtxyi = JiyiX = 2x0 ,          (26.5.10)
so thismatrix has eigenvalues +2xo and 0, with the last eigenvalue
            to the goldstino mode. In Chapter 29 we will show without
corresponding
the use of perturbation theory that the spontaneous breakdown of super-
symmetry requires the existence of goldstinos,and explore their general
properties.
86                     26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

     26.6     Superspace    Integrals, Field Equations, and the Current
                                        Superfield

The '^-terms' and 'D-terms' from which we construct the Lagrangian
density may be expressed as integrals over the superspace coordinates
0a. The rules for integrals over fermionic parameters originallygiven
by Berezin4 are derived in Section 9.5. Briefly,because the square of
any fermionic parameter vanishes, any function of a set of N fermionic
parameters £n may be expressed as

            /(£) = ( f[ £n ] c + terms with fewer f factors,        (26.6.1)

and itsintegralover the (^sisdefined simply by

                                                                    (26.6.2)
                                 jdNU'({)sc.
The coefficientc may itselfdepend on other unintegrated c-number
variables
      that anticommute with the ^s over which we integrate,in which case
itisimportant to standardize the definitionof c by moving all^s to the left
of c before integratingover them, as we have done in Eq. (26.6.1).With
this definition,integration over fermionic variables is a linear operation.
It resembles the integral over a real variable in the sense that, since a
shift£n —► £n + &n of the variable t;nby a constant an changes the product
Y\n £n only by terms involving fewer £ factors,itdoes not affectthe value
of the integral

                                         =                          (26.6.3)
                           JdNZf(e+a)        JdNef(Z).
Also, as a special case of Eq. (26.6.2),the integral over N fermionic
parameters of a polynomial of order < N vanishes. Integrals over
fermionic and bosonic parameters are strikingly differentin the way
they respond to change of variables:for bosonic parameters xn we have
dNx' = Det (dx'/dx) dNx, while for fermionic parameters

                           dN? = \te\{d?/d£)TldNZ        .          (26.6.4)
In particular,the dimensionality of d^ is opposite to the dimensionality of
{.
   According to Eq. (26.2.10),the D-term of a general superfieldS(x,0)
(which may be elementary or composite) is equal, up to a derivativeterm,
to the coefficientof -{9y59f/4 = -{d1edf/A. Any one of the four 6s
can be 0i, and each possibilitygives an equal contribution, so we may
assume that Q\ is the left-most,and pick up a factor of 4. Then 62 must
be the next-to-left-most.Any of the two remaining 0s may be 03, and
      26.6 Superspace Integrals,Field Equations, Current Superfield                       87

each possibilitygives an equal contribution,so we may assume that #3 is
third from the leftand pick up a factor of 2, and 04 must then be the
right-most.That is,

                  -\{hs0)2         = -J X 4 X 2 X 01020304 ,

so the coefficientof thisfunction of 0 is —1/2 the integralover d46. Since
thisisthe D-term up to a derivative,we have then

                   / d4x [S]D = ~             d4x f d46 S(x,0).                      (26.6.5)
                                          [
In the same way, using Eq. (26.3.11),
                                    we find that the spacetime integralof
the ^-term of a general left-chiralsuperfieldO (again,either elementary
or composite) may be expressed as

                  / d4x [®]*r = 1 fd4x             f d26L 0>(x,0).                   (26.6.6)

  Since we are now integrating over 0s, it is convenient to introduce a
delta function, defined as usual by the condition that for an arbitrary
function /(0)

                             tftf s\Q> - 0)/(#') = /(0).                             (26.6.7)
                        /■
According to Eq. (9.5.40),thiscondition is satisfiedby
      5\e' -e) = (0; - e{02 - Oi03             -
                                                   0*04
                                                             - 04)

                  -                 -                   -         e       -         • <26-6-8>
        =\   [K       etfe     K        ^)]   [(^           ^)T       K       ^)]
  The representation of the action as an integralover superspace allows
an easy derivation of the fieldequations in superfieldform. Consider, for
instance, the action for a set of left-chiralscalar superfieldsOn (which
includes as a specialcase the general renormalizable theory of left-chiral
superfieldsOn):

        I=        d4x                    + 2Re          d4x Lf(O)]^ ,                (26.6.9)
             \j         [K(0, &)]d                  f
with K an arbitrary function of On and O* without derivatives,and /
an arbitrary function of On, also without derivatives. (The motivation
for this form of the action and the expression of the action in terms
of component fieldsis described in Section 26.8.) We cannot derive
correct fieldequations by simply demanding that this is stationary with
respect to arbitrary variations in O, because the On are constrained by
the requirement that they satisfythe requirement @R<S>n = 0 for left-
chiral superfields.To make sure that this condition is preserved by any
variation,we can use a trickthat willalso turn out to be usefulin deriving
88                   26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

superspace Feynman rules in Chapter 30. We              write the On in terms of
potentialsuperfieldsSn(x,0) as
                                                                            (26.6.10)
from which itfollows (using Eq. (26.A.21))that

                                                                            (26.6.11)
where Q)\ and 3f2L are abbreviations for {2\e2R) = — (@r@>r) and
{0\eQ)^) = (@>l@l), respectively. To see that it is always possible to
find an Sn (not necessarilylocal)that satisfies
                                              Eq. (26.6.10),note that for
any left-chiralsuperfieldsOn,

                           22R22Ld>n = -16Dd>n ,                            (26.6.12)
so that Eq. (26.6.10)is satisfiedby the solution of
                             - 16DSn =
                                            ®2L<bn .                        (26.6.13)
  The expression 3)2RS is left-chiralfor any S, so the action must be
stationarywith respect to arbitraryvariationsin the Sn. Using Eq. (26.6.5),
the action may be expressed in terms of the Sn and S* as

     / = - 7 fd4x   fd46 K{-92LS*,     ®\S) + 2 Re          / d4x .
                                                       [f(®2RS)]
                                                              (26.6.14)
The variation of the firstterm under infinitesimalchanges SSn in the
Sn (but not the S*) is easily calculated by an integration by parts in
superspace:

              -<4   fd4x   f d46 K{-22LS\      ®\S)




Eqs. (26.3.31)and (26.6.5)allow us to express the variation of the integral
in the superpotential term under infinitesimalchanges 3S„ in the S„ as

                                                             @zRssn
                                                       <Sf=3\S

                                     dAx                             ssn)
                           -if n J                          ^=@\S           &
                                              em)
                                      d«x                      ssn
                                               d®„

                                                                     SSn.
                           --?/*/*                     V£      <t>=3)2RS
      26.6 Superspace Integrals,Field Equations, Current Superfield    89

The condition for Eq. (26.6.14)to be stationary with respect to arbitrary
variationsin Sn is then

                     v
               >25K{-®lS\®\S)    K      _=-4 .dm)
              *i       :%j
                       d®\Sn                   30>n 0=^S
or in terms of the chiral superfields


                      *»£*££>           __4«£».                  (26.6.15)

The complex conjugate yields




Itcan readilybe checked that the components of these equations yield the
fieldequations for the components of O* and On. For instance,recalling
that 9\{0yeR) = -4, the ^-independent part of 22R<b*nis4^;, while the 0-
independent part of d /(0)/3 On isd f{<j))/d    so the ^-independent part
                                            </>„,
of Eq. (26.6.15)for K = En<&*n<&nyields the relation&mn = - d f{(f>)/d </>„,
in agreement with Eq. (26.4.6).
  As an example of the use of thisformalism, letus consider the superfields
to which conserved currents belong. Suppose that the superpotential and
Kahler potentialin the action (26.6.9)are invariantunder an infinitesimal
global transformation
       <50>n= ieY, ^nm<t>m ,      SVn = -ie £ <Tmn&m ,           (26.6.17)
                 m                           m
with e a realinfinitesimalconstant and Fnm a Hermitian matrix, perhaps
part of a Lie algebra of similartransformation matrices.Since the super-
potentialdepends only on the On, itis automatically also invariant under
the extended transformations

     <50>n= feA £ iTnm(Dm ,      50>; = -feA* £ fmnK       ,     (26.6.18)
                 m                             m
where A(x,0) is a superfieldthat must be taken left-chiral   in order that
the 5Q>n be left-chiral,but is otherwise unrestricted.On the other hand,
other terms such as the Kahler potentialare not in general invariantunder
these transformations, because A ^ A*. For general fieldsthe change in
the action must thereforebe of the form

                    SI = ie f d4x f d46 [A - A*]/ ,              (26.6.19)

where /(x, 0) issome real superfield,known as the current superfield. But
ifthe fieldequations are satisfiedthen the action is stationary under any
variationin the superfields,so the integral(26.6.19)must vanish for any
90                         26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

          superfieldA(x, 0).Any such A may be put in the form A = 22RS,
left-chiral
so thismeans that the current superfieldmust satisfy

                                       0*/       = #l/   = O.                       (26.6.20)
That is,f is a linear superfield.As we saw in Section 26.3, this means
that itscomponents satisfy
     NS = MS        =
                        d^vf
                                = 0,           )/ = - fa* ,       D* = -DC*     .   (26.6.21)
This allows us to identifythe K-component V* as the conserved current
associated with this symmetry.
  For the particularaction (26.6.9),the current superfieldtakes the form

           * = Z^                    STnmVm = ^                     ^mn^m   >       (26.6.22)
               nm        fthn                 nm          ^ »
with the equality of these two expressions a consequence of symmetry
under the transformation (26.6.17).Then, using the fieldequation (26.6.15),

            =                                          = -4       d/m
     &*S        E                              rnm*m          £                 , (26.6.23)
                    ^^5*                                          ^J^-*-
which vanishes because of the assumed invariance of the superpotential
under the transformation (26.6.17).In the same way, using the second of
the two expressions for f and the fieldequation (26.6.16),we find that
3>\f = 0, thus verifyingthe conservation condition (26.6.20).


                                    26.7       The Supercurrent

Like any other continuous global symmetry, supersymmetry leads to the
existence of a conserved current.5 The conservation and commutation
properties of the supersymmetry current are operator equations that will
remain valid even when supersymmetry is spontaneously broken, and that
will therefore be useful to us in Chapter 29, when we consider theories
of spontaneous supersymmetry breaking in a non-perturbative context.
Also, the supersymmetry current is relatedto components of a superfield
known as the supercurrent,6that will be of fundamental importance in
our treatment of supergravity in Chapter 31.
  As we saw in Section 7.3,the existenceof an ordinary global symmetry
of the Lagrangian density under an infinitesimaltransformation x* —►
Xe + €&* (with xe a generic canonical or auxiliaryboson or fermion field
and <F* a function of the canonical and auxiliary fields)leads to the
existenceof a current

                                V                                  y
                                           Y    d(dX'(x)/dx»)
                         26.7 The Supercurrent                        91

which is conserved for fieldssatisfyingthe fieldequations, and generates
the symmetry in the sense that the canonical commutation relationsgive


                      Jd3xAx),/{y)]x^{y).
The supersymmetry current requires a somewhat more complicated
treatment
      for two reasons. One is that supersymmetry is only a symmetry of
the action,not of the Lagrangian density or the Lagrangian. Instead, the
variationof the Lagrangian density under an infinitesimalsupersymmetry
transformation isa spacetime derivative,which we may write in the form

                          5JS?=                                  (26.7.1)
                                  5^(a5^),
                                   e
with K^ a four-vector of Majorana spinors. In consequence, the super-
symmetry current is not the usual Noether current.The Noether current
isa four-vectorN^ of Majorana spinors defined by

                           dRse
                                                                 (26J-2)
                      Xm^"'-M-

whose divergence is given by the Euler-Lagrange equations as


             K»')=-Et^'-x:^w
                      = -5j2\                                    (26.7.3)

(Here 6r denotes the right partialderivative,defined by moving
differentiated
      fermionic variablesto the right before differentiating.)
                                                             Instead, we
must define the supersymmetry current as

                            S^ = N^+K^                           (26J A)
which Eqs. (26.7.1)and (26.7.3)tellus isconserved:

                                d^S" = 0 .                       (26.7.5)
  The second complication is that the change 5/f in a canonical fieldyf
under a supersymmetry transformation is not just a function of
canonical
    fields,but also involves their canonical conjugates. For instance,
Eq. (26.3.15)shows that the change in the tp-component of a chiral
scalar superfield involves the time derivative of the ^-component. As
a resultthe commutator of the Noether charge / d3x N° with a general
canonical fielddoes not give the supersymmetry transformation of that
field.Fortunately,thiscomplication iscancelled by the firstcomplication:
when the commutators of f d3xK° as well as f d3xN° with the fieldsare
taken into account, the operator j d3xS° does generate supersymmetry
92                  26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

transformations* in the sense that

                                              = idX<                  (26.7.6)
                        \Jd3x(aS°)9
consistentlywith Eqs. (26.2.1)and (26.2.8).
  For example, we may derive an explicitformula for the supersymmetry
current in the general renormalizable theory of left-chiral
                                                          superfieldsOn,
which can be used to check that itdoes generate supersymmetry
         in the sense of Eq. (26.7.6).The Lagrangian density (26.4.7)for
transformations,

*Thisisa                                    inthisway. For instance,
         generalresultforcurrentsconstructed                         considera
 LagrangianL (notLagrangiandensity) thatdependson a setofcanonical  variables
                                                                            qn
 and theirtimederivatives
                        qn,withno constraintsof any class.
                                                         In quantum field
                                                                        theory
 thelabeln includespatialcoordinatesaswellasdiscrete  spinand species     and
                                                                     labels,
 L = J <Px££. Our assumptionherethatthe Lagrangiandensityisinvariant     up to
 spacetimederivatives
                    undersome infinitesimaltransformation S means thatSL isthe
 timederivativeofsome functionalF. That is,
                            dL           dL
                       Z^ dqn H ^ dqn *           dt

 Using thecanonicalequationsof motion,thiscan be writtenas a conservation
                                                                        law
 Q = 0,wheretheconservedchargeis
                                     dL
                          •■-Es*'"- dqn
                                   n
 In our casehere,Q = j d3x [N°+K%     We assume theusualunconstrained
 commutation
       relations
                     0L          = — iSm
                                     lun f          = 0,
                     dqn                     [q",<lm]
 and findthecommutator

           M-"«--5:£&m+s:sfM-nl                   n
 To evaluatethesecondand thirdterms,we notethatthesecondtimederivatives qn
 appearlinearlyin the invariancecondition,                must match: even
                                         so theircoefficients
 withoutusingtheequationsof motion,we have
                                   dL dSq1   dF_ '
                             E     dql dqn   dqn
 The secondand thirdtermsinthecommutatortherefore     leavingus withthe
                                                cancel,
 desiredresult
                                   =idqm-
                            [<2,qm]
 Takingthetimederivative
                      givesalso
                                   =i?>qm.
                            [Q,qm]
          hasbeenextendedtotheories
 Thisresult                       withconstraints.7
                                26.7 The Supercurrent                              93

this theory may be put in the form

                    -               i/      ua   \ - i/
     ^ = £                   d^^n - - (\pLny% ip£.«) 2 (v«« T%
                        d„<l>*n                                         Vite)
            + non-derivative terms                                          (26.7.7)
Using the transformation rules (26.3.15),(26.3.17),(26.3.18),and (26.3.20)
(with <j>= 4>*),the Noether current defined by Eq. (26.7.2)is

 *" =                          VnL + 2 (d»<t>„)
                                             xpnR+ (Un) fVnR                J^nL
        -7| £       [2 (W-)                                        +(Wn)


        -FntVnR-KtVnl\.                                                     (26.7.8)
We can calculatethe change in the Lagrangian density either directly,or,
more easily,by noting that the changes of D-terms and #"-terms under
supersymmetry transformations are given respectivelyby Eqs. (26.2.17)
and (26.3.16).Either way, we find that the current K^ in Eq. (26.7.1)is
                1
     K' =                     - (Hn) WnR - (Wn) VnL +
                                                      ^*n VnL + &n WnK
             T2^'

             +2                                                             (26.7.9)

Adding (26.7.8)and (26.7.9)gives the supersymmetry current for thisclass
of theories

s" = V5£        (MnWVnR        + (WnWVnL      +          tVnL +            y"VnR
                                                  (Jfy            (^)
                                                                  (26.7.10)
It is straightforward then to use the canonical commutation and anti-
commutation relationsto verify that Jd3xS° satisfiesthe commutation
relations(26.7.6).
  There is another definitionof symmetry currents, in terms of the
responseof the matter action to a local symmetry transformation, which is
particularlyusefulwhen the associated symmetries are 'gauged,'as super-
symmetry willbe when we turn to supergravity theoriesin Chapter 31. In
the absence of supergravity fields,the action is not invariant under local
supersymmetry transformations.If we make such a transformation with a
spacetime-dependent parameter a(x),the action willchange by an amount
that,in order to vanish when a(x) is constant, must (even when the field
equations are not satisfied)be of the form

                          SI = - fd4x
                                           ((^a(x))S"(x)) ,                (26.7.11)

with S^(x) a four-vector of Majorana          spinor operator coefficients.This
94                     26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

does not define S^(x) uniquely, because when we generalizeglobal super-
symmetry transformations to local transformations, we might in general
give the change 5x of a fieldx under a local supersymmetry
     an arbitrarydependence on the derivativesof a(x).There is,however,
transformation
one way of defining local supersymmetry transformations that guarantees
that the coefficientS^(x) in Eq. (26.7.11)isthe same as the current defined
by Eq. (26.7.4),which as we have seen generates the symmetry
          in the sense of Eq. (26.7.6).It is to specify that derivativesof
transformations
a(x) do not  appear in the supersymmetry transformationof the canonical or
auxiliaryfieldsxf- For instance,the local versions of the transformation
rules (26.3.15)—(26.3.17)for the components of a left-chiral superfieldare

            5ipL(x) = yj2d^(x) y» aR(x) 4>(x)+ yjl^{x) aL(x),        (26.7.12)
            5^(x) = yfifax) $ipL(x)) ,                               (26.7.13)
                  =
            6<t>{x)                  .                               (26.7.14)
                     ^(xK(x)xpL(x))
Eq. (26.3.21)shows that the superfieldmay be expressed in terms of its
component fieldsat x^. without derivatives,so the transformation rule for
the superfieldmay be expressed as

                         <50(x,0) = (a(x+) jg)*(x, 0),               (26.7.15)

where 2,is the operator (26.2.2).
  With local supersymmetry transformations defined in this way, the
change of the action that they induce consists of two terms. First,
although the variation in canonical fieldsunder a supersymmetry
           does not involve derivativesof a(x),the variationin derivatives
transformation
of canonical fieldsdoes. This produces a change in the Lagrangian density
which is the same as Eq. (26.7.2),except that a is replaced with d^a:


                       51/=-y>d4x([^a(x)]iV^(x)).
The second term in the change of the action arisesfrom the fact that the
Lagrangian density is not invarianteven under the part of the
      transformation that does not involve derivativesof a(x).According
supersymmetry
to Eq. (26.7.1),this produces a change in the action

        52I =   fd4x                   = -   fd4x                    .
                        (a(x)^X^(x))                ((^a(x))X^(x))

Adding S\I and 62I gives a totalchange in the action of the form (26.7.11),
with S^(x) given by Eq. (26.7.4),as was to be shown.
  Even with this specificationof the transformation property of the
        fields,the supersymmetry current S^(x) is not uniquely specified
component
                              26.7 The Supercurrent                    95

by Eq. (26.7.11),because we could always introduce a modified current

                               S£ew = S" + dvA'l\                 (26.7.16)

where A^v = —AVfi is an arbitrary antisymmetric tensor of Majorana
spinors. The term dvAVv is conserved whether or not the fieldequations
             and itstime component isa space derivative,so / d3x S®QV,=
are satisfied,
/ d3x S°, leaving Eq. (26.7.6)unchanged.
  There is in fact a particularchoice of A^v with the convenient feature
that y^S^ew turns out to be a measure of the violationof scale invariance
by the theory.By using the Dirac equations derived from the Lagrangian
density (26.4.7):




                                                                  (26.7.17)
itis straightforward to calculatethat

                  =
             y^        -2V2^| n        9(4>nVnR+<l>nVnL)
                                   I


                       H?^^                       ~*Mv,,t




We can eliminate the firstterm by introducing a modified supersymmetry
current of the general type of Eq. (26.7.16):


        S£w = S" + X      [7"' f] S        ^ (+nVnR + 0>»l)   ,   (26.7.18)
                                       n
for which




                   +                                              (26719)
                       l?^w^-2^rj                       *•*)•
The right-hand side vanishes for a scale-invariantLagrangian density,
with /(O) a homogeneous polynomial of third order in the On.
  We now turn to the supersymmetry transformation property of the
supersymmetry current. It is straightforward to check that the current
given by Eqs. (26.7.18)and (26.7.10)isrelatedto the co-component co® of
96                          26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

a real non-chiral superfield©^ by**

                               S£w = -2coe» + If f of ,                             (26.7.20)
where

           =                          "              +                         .    (26.7.21)
      <^           J2 E    4(W"           4*»W
                                                         ((^®>^(^®n))|
The superfield©^ isknown as the supercurrent.
  The supercurrent obeys a conservation law that incorporates the
          of the supersymmetry current (26.7.20)and much else besides.
conservation
To derive it,we may use the anticommutation relation(26.2.30)to write^

                                  [9r9(®l9l)]        = -4 99l-

Together with the chiralityconditions S>R<S>n= @L®n                      = 0> this gives


           n                                     n                            n
and


               n                             n                       n
so that the superfield(26.7.21)satisfies


                           n                                     n
                                                                 (26.7.22)
We saw in Section 26.6 that the fieldequations for the Lagrangian density
(26.4.7)may be expressed in the form

                                                                                    (26.7.23)
                               (.„o*~4«g»y

**Here we introducea notationthatwillbe used          in Chapter31;following
                                             extensively
               the components Cs, cos,Ms, Ns, Kvs,As, and Ds of an arbitrary
  Eq. (26.2.10),
           S(x,0) aredefinedby theexpansion
  superfield
               S(x,0)= Cs(x)-i(dy5CDs(x?)-^(ey56^Ms(x)-^(ee^Ns(x)

                                                                     +
                          +L(oy5yveys(x)-i(ey5e^e[iHx)                   \^


                          -\(dy50} 2\ds(x)+\oCs(x)

f Itshouldbe notedthat@>land <3raretheleft-and right-handed
                                                          componentsofthe
          adjoint0, ratherthanthecovariant
  covariant                              adjoints<3Land @>R of @>Land @>R.
                             26.7 The Supercurrent                     97

Using thisin Eq. (26.7.22)gives finally




                                                                  (26.7.24)
                 -3'**       S>^-3/(.>
The Hermitian adjoint of Eq. (26.7.24)is


        y"^n0«      = -^i^L                                       (26.7.25)
                                     £*.^-3/c>
The sum of thisand Eq. (26.7.24)then gives the conservation law

                                ylt@elt = ®X,                     (26.7.26)
where X is a real chiral superfieldgiven (up to an additive constant) in
thisclassof theoriesby

                    X = hm                                        (26.7.27)
                        3        ?^-»»

  Although it has been derived here only for renormalizable theories
of chiral superfields,we may expect that the conservation law (26.7.26)
holds more generally,though of course with X not necessarilygiven by
Eq. (26.7.27),because of the other conservation laws that it incorporates.
(A generalizedformula forX willbe given in Section 31.4.)To derive these
relations,we must use Eq. (26.2.10)to express ©^ in terms of components
C®, co®, etc.and use Eq. (26.3.9)to express the chiral superfieldX in
terms of components Ax9 \px,etc.With the aid of Eqs. (26.A.9),(26.A.16),
(26.A.17),and the Dirac matrix identities

                         [y0,y°] = -{ie^y5[y„yv],                 (26.7.28)

         y»yPy* = yfPf - fj^yP + ^Py* + iy$^^               ,     (26.7.29)
we can then expand both sidesof Eq. (26.7.26)in the terms

                 i, 0,      y50, 7V0,     757*0, ysb^yie,

                 (90),     (0y50),     (075/0),

                 0(0750),     750(0750),     7V0(0750),

                 7V750(0750),        [Vp,v°]0(dys0)9   (0750)'.
Matching the coefficientsof 1, 0, 750, 7V0, 757v0, 75[7^,7V]0,respectively,
98                    26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

yieldsthe results'1"''
                        VX = -mf(o*            ,                    (26.7.30)
                        Fx = d»C® ,                                 (26.7.31)
                        Gx = (Fe^   ^                               (26.7.32)
                            = -N®,                                  (26.7.33)
                      dftAx
                            = M® ,                                  (26.7.34)
                      dpBx
                          0 = V% - V* + e^padaC@P             .     (26.7.35)

Matching the coefficientsof either (60) or (0y50) yieldsthe same result:
                                        0 = /A®,                    (26.7.36)
and matching the coefficientsof (6ysyv0) yieldsthe result
           - iys [f             =
                      ,$]VX  2y"ftf + f [f, fl cojf.            (26.7.37)
From Eqs. (26.7.30),(26.7.36),and (26.7.37)we obtain the conservation of
the supersymmetry current (26.7.20):
                      0 = «ew       = -2^o>®       + 2 ^"o>® ,      (26.7.38)
and a relationamong     A® and
                                    -
                          Af =           fa>f + dvfa>*.             (26.7.39)

Matching the coefficientsof 0(0ys0) and y50(6ys6) gives relationsthat
can be obtained by taking the divergence of Eqs. (26.7.34)and (26.7.33),
respectively.Matching the coefficientsof yp6(6y50) gives
                                          -
                  dpGx = d»V% + &>V*        dpVe\ ,            (26.7.40)
which, combined with Eq. (26.7.32),yields the conservation law

                                    ^T"v=0,                         (26.7.41)
where T^v isthe symmetric tensor

                      T^^-LV*-              JKj + ^vK6^.            (26.7.42)

Matching the coefficientsof ypy59(9ys6) gives
                 d^F* = 2D® + DC® + epv<7fidv VepG ,                (26.7.43)
which, with Eqs. (26.7.31)and (27.6.35),yieldsa relationbetween D® and
S* *
                                = -DC®        + 3^vCf     .         (26.7.44)
                          Djf

++Note thatV® isthe Vv-componentof
                                   0^, not the V^-componentof 0V.
                                  26.7 The Supercurrent                              99

Matching the coefficientsof [yp,ya]0(6ys6)and (OysO)2 gives resultsthat
already follow from Eq. (26.7.34)and from Eqs. (26.7.38)and (26.7.39),
respectively.
  The conserved symmetric tensor T^v may be identifiedas the energy-
momentum    tensor of the system. To check this,we use Eqs. (26.1.18)and
(26.2.12) write the change in co®(x) under a supersymmetry
         to
transformation
       with infinitesimalparameter a as
                        = -i                 =
                 dotf            [(ga), cojf] +i[a>*9 (ga)]


                       allow us to put thisin the form
Eqs. (26.7.33)-(26.7.35)
            =                + V%)-d,{Bx     +ysAx)-iys       0C® + \e»VK<JfdKCe° .
*{<»?> Q}        \y\V%
In terms of the currents (26.7.20)and (26.7.42),thisreads
     i{S£ew,Q}=2yv           T"v + 2(d» - y» 0)(BX + y5Ax) - e^yvdKCf
                                                        -                  . (26.7.45)
                        +2iy5{ $Ce»-y»yx         $Cf        Jy"[*,y*]C?)
For /x= 0 allthe terms on the rightexcept the firstare space derivatives,
and thereforevanish when we integrateover space, leaving us with

                        *        d3x Sn°ew,   = 2yv &\ T0v .                 (26.7.46)
                            {/             Q}      J
We have defined the supersymmetry current S£ew to give / d3x S£ew = Q>
so the fundamental anticommutation relation(25.2.36)tellsus that

                                         d'xT"v =P\                          (26.7.47)
                                    /■
which, with the conservation condition (26.7.41),allows us to identifyT^v
as the energy-momentum     tensor.
  It is important to note which energy-momentum      tensor we have
         in this way. Either directlyfrom Eq. (26.7.21),or by considering
constructed
the supersymmetry transformation of the current (26.7.18),we can
calculate
    that the energy-momentum     tensor T^v for renormalizable theoriesof
chiralsuperfieldsis

                                                                        15/(0) I21
                                                                     +
                                                            d*4>*„dx<l>n
             n                                          n                 d<t>n

            + I(^vD      _                +     ... s
                             0M0V) £ |^|2                                    (26J.48)
                                    n
where the dots denote terms involving fermions, which do not concern
us here. We see that the last term, which is related by supersymmetry
100                 26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

to the correction term in Eq. (26.7.18),has the effectthat the energy-
momentum     tensor is tracelessfor the massless free-fieldtheory with no
superpotential,in which case □(/>„= 0. A simple calculation shows that
T^v isalso tracelessmore generally for scale-invarianttheories,with /(0)
a homogeneous polynomial of third order in the 0n.
  Supersymmetry also imposes an interestingrelation among violations
of scaleinvariance and R conservation. Eqs. (26.7.30)-(26.7.32) show that
       = 6^^0^5 ^C®, and Txx =               (which measures the violation
^S&w                                 2K0%
of scale invariance) are proportional to components of a chiralsuperfield
X, so if any one of these vanishes as an operator equation (that is,not
just for some particularfieldconfiguration),then they alldo. In thiscase,
we can show that Cep is proportional to the current of an R quantum
number. To see this,note that Eq. (26.2.11)gives
                      -,0
                   8<2 = i Cf,(ae)]=i(ay5cof),
so that in general

                            [cf,Q]=y5of.                        (26.7.49)

We have seen that if Cf isconserved then y^ = 0, so that Eq. (26.7.20)
gives SG = —2o)f. Setting a = 0 and integrating over x in Eq. (26.7.49)
then gives

                        </3xcO0,e      = -i75G-                 (26.7.50)
                      /
We can thereforeintroduce a current
                              #   = 2C^0,                       (26.7.51)
which ifconserved is the current of a quantum number 0t = fd3x0t° for
which QL and Qr destroy the values +1 and —1, respectively.Since the
commutator of Ql with a scalar superfieldO involves a term 3O/30l> this
means that 0l carriesthe 0t value +1, in accord with the usual definition.
A theory in which the superfieldX vanishes, or, equivalently,in which
T%, 7^, and d^         all vanish, is invariant under an enlarged set of
supersymmetry transformations, generated by the superconformal algebra
described at the end of Section 25.2.
  In scale-invarianttheoriesthe value of the 0t quantum number carried
by various superfieldsis fixed by the structure of the Lagrangian. For
instance, in a scale-invarianttheory of chiral scalar superfields,the
             must be a homogeneous
superpotential                          polynomial of third order in the
superfields.The ^-term of the superpotential is proportional to the
        of 0£, which has 01 quantum number +2, so the 0t quantum
coefficient
number of the ^-term of the superpotential is the 01 quantum number
of the superpotential itselfminus two. 0t invariance then requires that
                              26.7 The Supercurrent                                 101

we give the scalar superfieldsan 0t quantum number +2/3, so that the
superpotentialwillhave 0t quantum number +2, and its^-term willhave
01 quantum number zero.That is,the scalarcomponents <j)n  have 0t = 2/3
and the spinor components \pni (proportional to the coefficientof 0l in
the superfield)have 01 = —1/3. This can be verifiedby calculating the
current 0^ from the C-term of the supercurrent (26.7.21)for thisclassof
theories:
                                -             -
             &v=\i     W^(j>        tfrdpf]       J i (vwv)      •              (26.7.52)

(The second term contains an extra factorof 1/2 because xp isa Majorana
spinor.)
  Quantum correctionscan introduce violationsof 0t invariance (through
Adler-Bell-Jackiw anomalies) and of scaleinvariance (through the renor-
malization group running of the coupling constants) but supersymmetry
continues to impose a relationbetween these symmetry violationsdespite
these corrections.7*We willsee an example of thisin Section 29.3.


  The conservation condition (26.7.26)does not uniquely determine either
the supercurrent ©^ or the associated chiral superfieldX. In particular,
we may add to ©^ a change

                                    A0" = d"y ,                                 (26.7.53)
with Y an arbitrary chiral superfield.The left-hand side of Eq. (26.7.26)
isthen changed by

                                JH&A&1    =$®Y        .

                superfield YL the chiralitycondition 3>rYl = 0 and the
For a left-chiral
anticommutation relations(26.2.30)give

            99aY   =-\[{9l,9r}9*\Jl




The matrix eys in Q)^ in the second term on the right of the above
expression may be moved to the finaloperator Q)^ so that the chirality
condition and anticommutation relationsgive
                                =                               = 2(0@)aYL ,
        Y,9lh9r*9lpYl               -^2@lp@r«@lpYl
         P                             P
and hence

         fQYL      = - i             Yl + 2 $@Yj^         = -            Yl .
                           ]^(Q2)                               \q{qQ)
102                 26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

The same result can be derived in the same way for any right-chiral
superfield,and hence itholds also for an arbitrary sum Y of a left-chiral
and a right-chiralsuperfield

                              =@@Y   =                    Y .      (26.7.54)
                    y^A0"                    -\9(&9)
This is of the same form as the conservation condition (26.7.26),with the
associated chiral superfieldX changed by the chiral superfield
                             AX = -\(@@)Y          .               (26.7.55)
It is easy to check that the addition of A0^ to 0^ changes T^° and
S^ew only by space derivatives,and thereforedoes not change the energy-
momentum    four-vectorP^ or the supercharge Q.
  We saw in Section 26.6 that any chiral superfieldX may be expressed
in the form X = (3>3>)S,and hence can be removed by adding a term
of the form (26.7.55)to 0^ with Y = 4S. But in general S and the new
0^ constructed in this way will not be local. This situation is already
familiarfrom our experience with triangleanomalies, discussed in Chapter
22 — we saw there that,although itis always possible to construct terms
that if added to the Lagrangian density would cancel these anomalies,
in general these terms would not be local,and hence must be excluded
from the Lagrangian density. There are chiral superfields that can be
expressed as {2)2)S with S local, and that therefore,if present in the
associated chiral superfieldX, could be eliminated by adding local terms
of the form (26.7.53)to 0^. They include, for instance, a term of the
form Re (kdf(<S>)/d<S>\ with k an arbitrary complex constant, because
the field equations (26.6.15) and (26.6.16) show that (S^)Re(/c*0>) =
4Re (/c3/(0)/30). But in general the changes in X that can be made in
this way are quite limited.



                   26.8     General Kahler Potentials*

There are severalcircumstances in which itis necessary to consider non-
renormalizable Lagrangian densitiesof the general form (26.3.30)

                   <£ = 2Re              +                  ,        (26.8.1)
                               [/(*)]^        {[K(^^)]D
where the superpotential / is an arbitrary function of left-chiralscalar
superfieldsOn but not theirderivatives,and the Kahler potentialK is an
arbitraryfunction of the On and O* but not theirderivatives.

* Thissectionlies omewhat out of thebook'smain lineof development,
                                                                 and may be
  omittedina first
                 reading.
                     26.8 General Kahler Potentials                  103

  This situationarisesin effectivefieldtheories whose symmetries rule
out any renormalizable interactions,or in which the renormalizable
           all happen to be small. It is often then possible to calculate
interactions
scatteringamplitudes at low energy from tree graphs, using a Lagrangian
with the smallest value for some combination of the numbers of
      fermion fields,and any small renormalizable couplings. In Section
derivatives,
19.5 we examined such an effectivefieldtheory with no renormalizable
couplings, involving nucleons and soft pions. The dynamically broken
gauge theoriesdiscussed in Section 21.4 provide examples of effectivefield
theories of this sort with small renormalizable couplings. This
        also arisesin supersymmetric theories whose symmetries do not
circumstance
allow a superpotential,or where the superpotential is for some reason
small. We will encounter an example of this sort when we consider the
extended N = 2 supersymmetric theory of Abelian gauge superfieldsand
gauge-neutral chiralscalar superfieldsin Section 29.5.We willshow there
that low-energy scatteringamplitudes in this theory are generated by tree
graphs using a Lagrangian density of the form (26.8.1),with / = 0 and
K a function only of the On and O* but no derivatives,plus ^-terms
quadratic in gauge superfields.The inclusion of Kahler potentialshaving
arbitrarydependence on On and O* but not on theirderivativesis
       important in effectivefieldtheoriesin which some scalar fieldsare
particularly
of the same order of magnitude as the fundamental energy scale of the
underlying theory,although allother fieldvalues and allenergies are much
smaller.This willbe of interest,for instance,in connection with theories
of gravity-mediated supersymmetry breaking, discussed in Section 31.6.

  Let us consider how to express the Lagrangian density (26.8.1)in terms
of component fields.We did not use the assumption that /(O) is a cubic
polynomial in deriving Eq. (26.4.4),so thiscontinues to give the ^-terms
in the Lagrangian contributed by an arbitrarysuperpotential. To derive
the D-terms, we note that the term in the Kahler potentialof fourth order
in 9 is



 *(*,*•)*   = -« 1/.
                  (0750) £




                      -{OipnLJ (0 @ipmR)\
104                     26 Supersymmetric Field Theories



               +2Rtl|s|N                                            (M         (w)**




               +l(9»5»»»)(«y5)',«)X;
                                                  mn
                       l<52K(<£,<n
                   +
                       2 d<i>n4>„
                                                                                          (26.8.2)
We can again use Eqs. (26.A.18) and (26.A.19) as well as Eq. (26.A.9) to
put the 0 dependence of this expression in the form of an over-allfactor
(6y56)2,and find

                                 - -                                     -
 «(*,*   V = ^0)                       £                                     2E
                            |                 —g^—°*»                             —^—D^

              +E                                                +
                        i^tp            [fa       M                 fa       *M"2^"^]




                2          5<^"5<^m 5^< 5<^
                       mlrffc
                                                            -
              +E                        ^«        ^             ^ E          ^ ^       5^» *•«.
                          a<MC                                    nm             d(j)n
                                                                             d(t>n

                l^KOM*)
              -?E                      —5^*           a"^                                 (26.8.3)
                      ^•^
To make the realitypropertiesof the fermion kinematic terms transparent,
we can use Eq. (26.A.21) to write

                                              =                          ■
                           [y?n^WmRJ              {Wn $WmL)

The D-term of K{<b,<b*) is the coefficientof -(0ys0)2/A minus half
the d'Alembertian of the ^-independent term in K(0,<I>*),which is just
                      26.8 General Kahler Potentials                          105

K(M*),so




                               <33K(<M*)
                                  d<f>mdfyn(v?nWmL)^*(
                           ~f d<l>n


                    ♦«-sS&(*m^
                      1        d"K(4>,<t>')
                                                                       <26-8-4)
                    +^^^MW>
                        nmlk
              isthe Kahler metric
where ^(</>,</>*)

                        VnmW, <P ) =                                   (26.8.5)

Note that the constant matrix gnm in Eq. (26.4.2)is replaced here with the
Kahler metric ^nm(<£,</>*)■
                         Because the Kahler metric isfield-dependent,we
cannot in general make it equal to the unit matrix by a fieldredefinition,
so the totalLagrangian must be leftin the form

    if = Re Jj         -                                   -
                                  *(1 + ys)V») + <^«^m         Wn   d»<t>'m
                           j (W


                               ^(vWmZ.)^
                 ~i d<l>n
                        <tym d4>\




            1_       dAK{<t>,<t>')
            4^    5<^"5<^m 5<^7TTr(vnV«L)(vtV«)
              nnilfc           ^^
                    <?2/(4>)/_...      \ . ,„.^^         dfi<t>)
                                                                       (26.8.6)
           -R'£sf»^)+2R=2>.                              d(t>„
The bilinear(xp^ PysWn) is a total derivative,and could be discarded if
ynm were a constant, but must be kept for general Kahler potentials.This
resultwillbe extended to include gauge superfieldsat the end of Section
27.4.
                                    * * *
  As discussed in Section 19.6, the spontaneous breakdown           of a global
106                  26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

symmetry group G to a subgroup H entailsthe existence of a set of real
massless Goldstone bosons with scalarfields7^, for which the term in the
Lagrangian with the minimum number of derivativestakes the form
                             = ~                      ,              (26.8.7)
                      &g/h         £   GkM)^nkd^ne

where GkAn) is the metric of the coset space G/H.         (Theories with
Lagrangian   densitiesof this general  form  are known   as  non-linear g-
models.) By writing the complex fields <j)nin terms of their real and
                           —
imaginary parts, the term    2nm^nm(<k</>*)d^</>n3^<^ in the Lagrangian
density (26.8.6) can  be put in the form (26.8.7),but the converse is
not generally true: the condition that a set of real coordinates like the
Goldstone boson fields%k can be interpreted as the real and imaginary
parts of a set of complex coordinates like the fields<j>nwith the metric
in these coordinates locallygiven by Eq. (26.8.5)defines what is called
a Kahler manifold.** But it should not be thought that in the common
cases where G/H is not a Kahler manifold, it is impossible for G to
be spontaneously broken to H while keeping supersymmetry unbroken.
What happens in these cases is the appearance of extra massless bosons,
which, together with the Goldstone bosons, do form a Kahler manifold.
   This is because the superpotential /(</>)depends on (j>but not </>*,  so
if the whole Lagrangian is invariant under a global symmetry group G
then the superpotential is automatically invariant under a group Gc, the
complexification of G: if G consists of transformations expO'X^fl^)
with generators tA and arbitrary real parameters 9a, then Gc consistsof
transformations expO'X^z^)      with the same generators and arbitrary
complex parameters z^. (For instance, if G is U(n) then Gc is GL(n,C),
the group of all complex non-singular matrices, while if G is SU(n)
then Gc is SL(n,C), the group of all complex non-singular matrices with
unit determinant.) Likewise, if some stationary point </>(0)of /(</>)is left
invariant by some subgroup H of G, then itwillalso be leftinvariant by a

**The            of Kahler manifoldsin thiscontextwas pointedout in an early
       significance
  paperby Zumino.8Note thatitisnot necessary   forthemetricto be expressiblein
                 overthewhole manifoldwitha single
  theform (26.8.5)                                  Kahlerpotentialk(0,0*);it
  isonlynecessary thatthemanifoldcan be coveredin finite overlapping patchesin
  whichthisholds,withdifferent
                             Kahlerpotentials ineach patch.The simplestexample
  of a Kahlermanifoldistheflatcomplex plane,with Kahler potential  |z|2.As an
  exampleofa cosetspaceG/H thatisa Kahlermanifold,   Zumino gavethecasewhere
  G = GL(p,C)x GL(p + q,C)and H = GL(p,C),withp and q arbitrary positive-definit
          and GL(N,C) thegroup of complexnon-singular
  integers,                                           N x N matrices. The coset
  spaceG/H herehas complexcoordinates  <pnthatmay be takenasthecomponentsof
  a complexpx(p + q) matrixA, whichunderG and H undergoesthetransformations
  A-+ BAC and A —► BA, respectively,
                                   whereB and C aresquarenon-singular  complex
  matrices               p and p + q,respectively.
          of dimensionality                      The Kahlerpotentialinthiscase
  issimplyK ocInDet/l/l1.
                      Appendix      Majorana Spinors                      107

subgroup H€ of Gc, the complexification of H. Whether or not G/H is a
Kahler manifold, the complexified coset space G€/H€ is always a Kahler
manifold. This follows because Gc/ffc is a complex submanifold of the
flatcomplex space of the </>„,   which is a Kahler manifold, and it is a
theorem that any complex submanifold of a Kahler manifold isa Kahler
                                                   = [exp^'J^ z^)^0^,
manifold.9 If parameterized by the values of </>n(z)
the Kahler manifold G€/H€ has the metric obtained by embedding itin the
flatcomplex space of the </>„, usually taken with lineelement ^2n d<j>n
                                                                      d(j>*n.
  It is true that Gc is not a symmetry of the whole Lagrangian, but the
Goldstone bosons associated with the breakdown of Gc to H€ are
          exactly massless.This is guaranteed by the non-renormalization
nevertheless
theorem of Section 27.6, or, more simply, by the resultof Section 25.4,
that massless spin zero particlesmust come in pairs that are related by
supersymmetry transformations and that therefore have the same
           under any global symmetry group G that commutes with super-
transformation
symmetry.



                    Appendix        Majorana     Spinors

This appendix summarizes some algebraicpropertiesof Majorana spinors
that are needed in dealing with superfields.
  Consider a four-component fermionic Majorana spinor 5 that like Q or
6 may be expressed in the form

                               s=                                     (26.A.1)
                                    (***),
where q issome two-component        spinor and e isthe 2 x 2 matrix


                         es{-i           o)=i<T2-
Such a spinor isrelatedto itscomplex conjugate by




where e isthe 4 x 4 matrix

                                                                      (26.A.3)
                                 -(5!)
and as usual 75 and /? are 4 x 4 matrices

              W=
                    (J   -l)>                  P=(°1       J).
108                   26 Super symmetric Field Theories

with 1 and 0 understood here as 2 x 2 submatrices. Taking the transpose
of Eq. (26.A.2) and multiplying on the right by /? gives the equivalent
formula

                              s = stp = sT€ys.                         (26.A.4)
  The anticommutation of the spinor components limitsthe variety of
covariants that can be formed from a Majorana spinor. To see this,it
will be convenient firstto consider the symmetry properties of bilinear
covariants, which will be of some interestin themselves. For a pair of
Majorana spinors s\ and 52 and any 4x4 numerical matrix M, Eq. (26.A.4)
gives
         5i m 52 = Y, si<*            = -
                         sw (ey$M W        S52a 5i0 (ey*M )/*«

                  =                           =S2(ey5)~1MTey5si    ,
                      +Y,s2*Sip(MTey5)(Xp
                         a/?
with the minus sign following the second equal sign arising from the
fermionic nature of these spinors. In Section 5.4 we found that the 16
covariant matrices formed from Dirac matrices satisfy


                  1 -#M#               M = yfl,[yM,yv]

where <£ is the matrix

                         = 72j8=                         ■             (26.A.6)
                                   -6ys=(     o    °e)
It follows that

       <* Ms*     ~                                                    <26AJ>
                   { .(em„)            M = y„, [^yv]
In particular,settings\ = 52 = 5, we find that

                           5 liis = 5 [fy, yv]5 = 0 ,                  (26.A.8)
so the only bilinearcovariants formed from a single Majorana spinor 5
are ss, sysy^s, and 5755.
  In considering the form of the most general superfields,we need to
have expressions for the products of two or more Majorana spinors. For
two spinors,we recallthat any 4x4 matrix may be expanded as a sum of
the 16 covariant matrices 1, y^ [y^,yv],ysy^,y$. Lorentz invariance tells
us that for the matrix 5a sp thisexpansion must take the form
           55 = ks (55) + kv 7fi(sy*1s) + kT [y^,yv](s[y**,yv]s)
                  +kA yslix(sysy* s) + kP y5 (sy5 5),
                            Appendix       Major ana Spinors                         109

where the ks are constants to be determined. Eq. (26.A.8) shows that we
may take ky = kj = 0. The remaining coefficientsmay be calculated by
multiplying on the right with 1, ysy^, and 75 and taking the trace,which
gives ks = —1/4, fc^= +1/4, and kp = —1/4. In this way we find that
           5s = -1 (3s)+ \y5)V(sysy^s)- \y5(sy5s).             (26.A.9)
                                —
By multiplying on the right with ey5 and using Eq. (26.A.4),we may put
thisin the form
           =
    s*sp       \(ey5)ap(ss)+ \(yli€)ap(sysy'is)+^e^Csyss),                      (26.A.10)
or, equivalently,
  sa sp = \(ey5)ap(sTey5 s) + \ (y^p                (sTey» s) + \ eap (sTes).   (26.A.11)
  Now   consider the product s^spSy of three components of a Majorana
spinor 5.We  can divide 5 into left-and right-handed parts
    s = sL + sR ,           5L = K1 + ys)s,              sR = i(l - y5)s .      (26.A.12)
Each of sl and sr has only two independent components, so since the
square of any fermionic c-number vanishes, we have SLaSLpSLy = 0 and
SRaSRpSRy = 0 for alla, /?,and y, and therefore
                   = SLaSLpSRy + SLoLSRpSLy+ SRaSLpSLy + L <-►R ,
           S^SpSy
with 'L <-► R* denoting the sum of previous terms with labels L and R
interchanged. To evaluate this expression, we multiply Eq. (26.A.11) by
suitablefactorsof (1 + ys)/29and find
                           =
                    slolsLp \[e(l + ys)]ap(s[€SL).
If we now multiply this with sr7, since (s\€Sr)sr7 = 0 we can drop the
labelL on the spinors in the bilinear(s[€Sl):
                                    = \[e(l+ y5)]af(sTes)sRy .
                    sl*sLpsRy
The same arguments also yield
                                     =
                    SR<xSRpsLy           L4[e(l-y5)]<xp(sTes)sLy.
Adding the sum of these two expressions to the same quantity with y
replaced with a or /?yieldsfinally
                        =   1                   -                 -
               s*spsy                      sy
                                (sTes) [ea/?         (ey5)ap(y5s)y earsp
                                                  -
                            +(^5)«y (yss)p+ €py 5a (ey5)py(y5s)a\•              (26.A.13)
  To calculatethe products of four Majorana spinor components, we note
that (sTes)contains only terms with two sls or two srS, so

                        (sT€S)sySs= (sT€S)[SRySRS+SLySLs] .
110                     26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

Using Eq. (26.A.11) to evaluate the sum in square brackets, and noting
that
                                           -
             (sTes)(sTey5s)= (slesL)(sTResR)               = 0,
                                             (sTResR)(slesL)
we find that

                                 (sT€s)syss= L4eys(sTes)2
                                                        .                        (26.A.14)
Multiplying Eq. (26.A.13) with s$ therefore yields the result
                =                            -                 -
        SxSpSySs       £ (sTes) \eapeys          (ey5)ap(ey5)ys e<xyeps
                                               ~
                       +(cys)ay(cys)pd+ epy e*d (cys)py(eys)**]•                 (26.A.15)

Any product of five components of s vanishes, so this completes the list
of formulas for products of components of a Majorana spinor.
  We can use these formulas to derive some additional relationsthat will
be useful in dealing with superfields.By contracting Eq. (26.A.13) with
(ey5)pyand (eyjpy, we find

                                  sa (ss) = -(755^(5755)                         (26.A.16)
and

                            sa (sysfys) = -(^s)a(sy5s)          .                (26.A.17)
From Eqs. (26.A.16) and (26.A.17) we may derive Tierz' identities

         =                  ,                                                   . (26.A.18)
 (ss)        -(5755)      (5757^) (5757^) =-^v                       (575 s)
Also, Eq. (26.A.14) may be put in a covariant form
                                 (sy5s)ss = -\y5(s75s)2 .                        (26.A.19)
  Itwillalso be usefulto record the realityproperties of bilinearproducts
of Majorana spinors. For any pair of Majorana spinors s\,52 satisfying
the phase convention (26.A.1),Eqs. (26.A.2) and (26.A.4)give

             (J1MS2)* = —{s\eysMmsi)             = (siftey5M*       ftey5s2).
(The minus sign in the middle expression arisesfrom reversing the
       of 5i and 52 that occurs when we take the complex conjugate.) But
interchange
Eqs. (5.4.40)and (26.A.6)give fieysy^Peys= y^ so

                                                 " = l' ?"' ^'       ^
      f}ey5M*Pey5
      H n      H        =                                                 ,      (26.A.20)
                                {+M-M            M = ylly5,y5
                                \
and therefore
                                                     = l> y»> [y»y»]
      (STAf«)• = ( +fl^S2\                       MJJ = ylly5,y5                  (26.A.21)
                 \ -(slMs2)
                                  Problems                               111

  Finally,we mention that any spinor u may be written in terms of a pair
of Majorana spinors s+ as

                                u = s+ + is- ,                      (26.A.22)
where

        s+ = -(u-                      5_ = - (u +          .
                    Pey5u*^ ,                      Pey5u*^)         (26.A.23)

To check that s+ are Majorana spinors satisfyingEq. (26.A.2),itis only
necessary to recallthat Pey$ is real,and that (Peys)2 = 1.



                                 Problems

  1. Using the direct technique of Section 26.1 in the case of N = 2
     supersymmetry, find the supersymmetry transformation rules of the
     massive fieldsupermultiplet with just one Majorana spinor fieldand
     two complex scalars.

  2. Calculate the component     fieldsof a time-reversed superfield



     in terms of the components of the superfieldS(x,0). What sort of
     superfielddo we get by the time reversalof a left-chiral
                                                            superfield?
     Of a linearsuperfield?

  3. Consider the N = 1 supersymmetric theory of a singleleft-chiral
             O. In superfieldnotation, listallthe terms of dimensionality
     superfield
     5 involving O and/or O* that might be added to the Lagrangian
     density.

  4. Consider the theory of three left-chiral
                                            scalar superfieldsOi, €>2,and
     O3, with a conventional kinematic term, and with a superpotential

                       /(<&!,02,03) = OiOf+      02(0f
                                                         +
                                                             a) ,
     where a is a non-zero realconstant. Show that thisis a theory with
     spontaneously broken supersymmetry. Find the minimum value of
     the potential. Express the field of the goldstino in terms of the
     fermionic components of Oi, O2, and O3.

  5. Find all the components of the current superfield for the action
             in terms of the components of the left-chiral
     (26.6.9),                                           superfieldsOn
     and derivativesof the superpotential/ and the Kahler potentialK.
112                    26 Supersymmetric Field Theories

  6. Check that the supersymmetry current given by Eqs. (26.7.18)and
     (26.7.10)isrelatedto the co-component of the superfield(26.7.21)by
      Eq. (26.7.20).


                                 References

 1. A. Salam and J. Strathdee,Nucl Phys. B76, 477 (1974).This article
    is reprinted in Supersymmetry, S. Ferrara, ed. (North Holland/World
    Scientific,Amsterdam/Singapore, 1987).
 2. J. Wess and B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. B70, 13 (1974). This articleis
    reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 1.
 3. L. O'Raifeartaigh, Nucl. Phys. B96, 331 (1975). This articleis
    reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 1.
 4. F. A. Berezin, The Method of Second Quantization (Academic Press,
    New York, 1966).
 5. J. Iliopoulos and B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. B76, 310 (1974); S. Ferrara
    and B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. B87, 207 (1975). These articlesare
    reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 1.
 6. This sectionfollows the approach of S. Ferrara and B. Zumino, Ref.
    5.
 7. X. Gratia and J. Pons, J. Phys. A25, 6357 (1992). I am grateful
    to J. Gomis for suggesting the use of the equation matching the
    coefficientsof qn.
la. M. Grisaru, in Recent Developments in Gravitation- Cargese 1978,
    M. Levy and S. Deser, eds. (Plenum Press,New York, 1979): 577.
 8. B. Zumino, Phys. Lett. 87B, 203 (1979). This articleis reprinted in
    Supersymmetry, Ref. 1.
 9. P. Griffithsand J. Harris, Principlesof Algebraic Geometry (Wiley,
    New York, 1978): 109. I thank D. Freed for tellingme of this
    application of the general theorem.
                                  27


        Supersymmetric                 Gauge     Theories




The successfultheoriesof strong, weak, and electromagnetic interactions
described in the firsttwo volumes are all gauge theories.In order to see
how simple supersymmetry may make contact with reality,  we must
therefore
     consider how to construct actions that satisfyboth supersymmetry
and gauge invariance.1


       27.1   Gauge-Invariant     Actions for Chiral Superfields

Consider a setof Abelian or non-Abelian gauge transformations that leave
the supersymmetry generator Q invariant. (For simple supersymmetry
there is just one Majorana spinor supersymmetry generator, which can
only furnish a trivialrepresentation of any semi-simple gauge group.)
Each component fieldin a supermultiplet must transform in the same
way under such gauge transformations. In particular,for a left-chiral
superfieldwe have

              <M*) -► JZ     exp(i^tAAA(x)^j            ,
                                                  (t>m(x)
                                    A

              Vhl(x) -> ^2    exp(i^fAAA(x))       WmL{*) ,        (27.1.1)
                         m           A

                                                  &* m\X) 5
                             exp(i^^AA(x))

where tA are Hermitian matrices representing the generators of the gauge
algebra, and AA(x) are real functions of x** that parameterize a finite
gauge transformation. (We are using the same notation for gauge
           as in Section 15.1,except that in order to avoid confusion with
transformations
Dirac indices we label the gauge generators and gauge transformation
parameters with the lettersA, B, etc.instead of a, /?,etc.)
  The left-chiralsuperfield (26.3.11) involves derivatives of some of
the component fields,so its transformation is more complicated than

                                   113
114                27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

Eq. (27.1.1).However, Eq. (26.3.21)shows that the superfield does not
involve derivativesifexpressed in terms of 9l and the variable x+ defined
by Eq. (26.3.23).It thereforehas the transformation property

         On(x, 0) -+ Y,                           Om(x,0).           (27.1.2)
                          [exp (iE   UAA(x+))    n
If a term in the action depends only on left-chiralsuperfields,and not
their derivativesor complex conjugates, like the term f d4x\f(Q>)]^ in
             then it(and itscomplex conjugate) willbe invariantunder the
Eq. (26.3.30),
localtransformation (27.1.2)ifitisinvariantunder global transformations
with AA(x) independent of x^. The need for introducing gauge fieldsin
renormalizable theories of chiral superfieldsarises only in the D-terms,
which involve both On and O*. Because the matrices tA are Hermitian,
the Hermitian adjoint of Eq. (27.1.2)is

        *l(x>0) -> E*m<*'e)                                          (27.1.3)
                                 L[exp (-i^tAAA(x+y)
                                           a
If itwere not for the differencebetween AA(x+)* = AA(x-) and AA(x+),
thiswould just say that <&* transforms according to the representation of
the gauge group that is contragredient to the representation furnished by
O, and any function of O and & that is invariant under global gauge
transformations would also be invariant under local gauge
        Because x+ and x_ are different,we must introduce a gauge
transformations.
connection matrix Tnm(x, 0), with the transformation property

 T(x,0) -> exp (+i"£tAAA(x+y)        r(x,0) exp (-/^r^(x+))         . (27.1.4)
                   A                                A
Then by multiplying O* on the right with T we obtain a superfieldthat
transforms as

       9) r(x, 9)]n -> Y, [ot(*'°) r(*, 0)>]
 [<&t(x,                                   mmL[exP (-* E
                                                          ^ A"W))
                        m                               A
                                                                     (27.1.5)
so that any globally gauge-invariant function constructed from O and
O^T (and not theirderivativesor complex conjugates) willalso be locally
gauge-invariant. One obvious example is the gauge-invariant version
(O^TO)/) of the D-term in the Lagrangian constructed in Section 26.4.
  Any T(x,0) that transforms as in Eq. (27.1.4)willallow us to construct
gauge-invariant Lagrangians of chiral superfields. The choice is not
unique; if T transforms as in Eq. (27.1.4),and we multiply on the right
                   superfieldTl with the transformation rule
with any left-chiral

      TL(x,0) -> exp (i^2tAAA(x+))     YL(x,0) exp (-i£^AA(x+))        ,
            27.1 Gauge-Invariant Actions for Chiral Superfields                     115

then we obtain a new gauge connection that also satisfiesEq. (27.1.4).
One simplificationis to take T(x,0) Hermitian:

                                    r\x90) = r(x,0).                             (27.1.6)
This is always possible if there is any T(x,0) that satisfiesEq. (27.1.4),
for then by taking the Hermitian adjoint of Eq. (27.1.4)we easily see
that rt(x,0) transforms in the same way as T(x, 0), so if T(x, 0) is not
Hermitian then we can replace it with its Hermitian part (T + r*)/2
(or, if that vanishes, by its anti-Hermitian part (T — T^)/2i.) Another
simplificationof great physical importance is to express T(x, 0) in terms
of fieldswhose gauge transformation properties do not depend on the
specificrepresentation tA of the gauge algebra under which the chiral
superfieldO(x,0) transforms, so that these fieldscan be used to form
a suitablematrix T(x,0) for chiral superfieldsthat transform according
to any representation of the gauge group. For this purpose, it is useful
to recallthe Baker-Hausdorff formula, which states that, for arbitrary
matrices a and 6,

  eaeb = exp (a + b + ifoft]+ ifo [a,b]]+ A[6, [b,a]]+            (27.1.7)
                                                          '~),
where '•••'denotes higher-order terms that can be written as multiple
commutators of as and 6s, likethe second- and third-orderterms that are
shown explicitly.It follows from thisthat for any representation of a Lie
algebra,we have

        exp (£                exp (£             = exp                    ,      (27.1.8)
                      At)                  A,)           (£/V&)^)
                 A                     A                   A
where

   fA(aM    = aA +bA +                              -           CABCCCDEaBaDbE
                       {iY,CABcaBbc                      j-2£
                         BC                                BCDE
                     -T2 E    CABCCcDEbBbDaE+"               ,                 (27.1.9)
                         BCDE
which depends on the Lie algebra through itsstructureconstants Cabc,
defined as usual by

                       [tB,tc] = i^2,CABCtA ,
                                    A
but does not depend on the particularrepresentation furnished by the r^.
We willthereforetake T(x, 0) in the form

                            T(x, 0) = exp (-2 £     tA VA(x, 0)       ,       (27.1.10)
                                                                  J
where VA(x,Q) are a set of real superfields(so that T is Hermitian), not
depending on the representationof the gauge algebra furnished by the r^.
116                  27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

  We can achieve an important further simplificationby noting an
      symmetry of supersymmetric gauge theories. If some function of
additional
O and O^T is invariant under global gauge transformations, then it will
automatically be invariant not only under the local gauge
transformations      but also under the larger group of extended gauge
     (27.1.2)-(27.1.4),
transformations


                         exp(i5>i*V0))                     ®mL(x,e)             (27.1.11)
                      m L       A
and

      T(x,0) -+ exp (-i£^(x,0))            T(x,0) exp (+i'£ftAai(x90y)                ,

                                                               (27.1.12)
where Q^(x,0) isan arbitraryleft-chiral superfield— that is,an arbitrary
function of Ol as well as x+. Under this transformation,

                                                                     •••,
        vA(x, e) -+ vA(x, e)+l- [»v        6) - a^(x, ey] +                     (27.1.13)

where '•••'denotes terms arising from the commutators in Eq. (27.1.7),
which are of firstor higher order in gauge coupling constants. As a
                  superfield,Q may be written in the form (26.3.11)
general left-chiral

 <xV0)     = wA(x)                                    + irA(x)
                   -Ji(o      (^y1)         ^(*))                     (e (^^)         0)

             + z                       -
              -l-(dy5y,eyWA(x)             4(0750)         (d 9 (~)           ^(*))

             -±(ey5e)2nwA(x),                                                   (27.i.i4)

in which WA(x) and ifrA(x) are arbitrary complex functions of x^, and
we introduced Majorana spinors wA(x) defined so that the left-handed
spinor components of the superfieldsare ±(l + ys)wA(x). Using the
     conjugation properties(26.A.21) of Majorana bilinears,the complex
complex
conjugate of Eq. (27.1.14)gives

n*{x,ey    = wA\x)                                     + rA\x)
                     -Ji(e      {^^)         **(*))                    (o (1^*)           0)

                                                           $
             -\{hsy,e)d^wA\x)^(ey5e)                  (e       {^)          ™A(*))

             ~(eyse)2nwA*(x).                                                   (27.1.15)

We write the real superfieldsVA(x, 6) in terms of component                   fieldsas in
          27.1 Gauge-Invariant Actions for Chiral Superfields              117

Eq. (26.2.10):

  VA(x,0)=
               cV)-i(gy5^(x))-^(0y50)MA(x)-^(^)iVA(x)

                          ?" e) vA(x) - t(e y5 e) (e [iA(x) + l-^A(x)] \
               +^(oys


               -i(»»«)      2(da(x) +                               (27.1.16)
                                        ^BCa(x)Y

where CA(x), MA(x\ NA(x), and VA(x) are allreal,and coA(x) and XA(x)
are Majorana spinors. Using Eqs. (27.1.14)—(27.1.16)in Eq. (27.1.13),
we find that the component fieldsof the gauge superfieldundergo the
extended gauge transformation
                                               ••• ,
                   CA(x) -+ CA(x) - Im WA(x) +

                   coA(x) -+ coA(x) + 4=wA(x)      + ••• ,

                         -> VA(x) + d,Rc WA(x) + ••• ,
                   V?(x)
                                                ••• ,
                   MA(x) -+ MA(x) - Re 1trA{x)+                     (27.1.17)
                                                ••• ,
                   NA(x) -+ NA(x) + Im HTA{x) +
                                      •••
                   XA(x) -+ XA{x) +       ,
                          -+        +  ••• ,
                   DA(x)     DA(x)
where again '•••'denotes terms that arisefrom the structureconstants in
Eq. (27.1.9)and that are therefore proportional to one or more factors
of gauge coupling constants. We can use such an extended gauge
          to put the gauge superfieldsinto a convenient form, known as
transformation
Wess-Zumino gauge} in which

                  CA(x) = (oA(x) = MA(x) = NA(x) = 0 ,              (27.1.18)
so that

             vA(x, 6) =    l- 75 /          -
                            (e     e) vA(x)   i(e y5 e) (exA(x))

                          -l-{0ys9)2DA{x).                          (27.1.19)

To accomplish this to zeroth order in the coupling constants, it is only
necessary to set Im WA(x) = CA(x\ wA(x) = — y/2a>A(x),and if\x) =
MA(x) — iNA(x). For Abelian gauge theories, in which the structure
constants vanish, thisends our task.For non-Abelian gauge theoriesitis
necessary to add terms to Im WA(x), wA(x), and ifrA(x) of firstorder in
gauge coupling constants to cancel the terms arising from commutators
of zeroth-order terms, then add terms to Im WA(x\ wA(x), and ifA{x)
118                21 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

of second order in gauge coupling constants to cancel the terms arising
from commutators of first-orderterms with zeroth-order terms, and so
on. It isnot easy to calculatethe seriesof terms in Im WA(x), wA(x\ and
WA(x) needed to satisfythe gauge conditions (27.1.18)to all orders in
gauge couplings, but there is no need — the important thing is that itis
possible.
  Inspection of the transformation rules (26.2.11)—(26.2.14) shows that the
Wess-Zumino    gauge condition (27.1.18)is not invariant under supersym-
metry transformations unless VA = XA = 0, and the condition XA = 0 is
not supersymmetric unless also DA = 0, in which case the whole superfield
vanishes. Once we adopt Wess-Zumino         gauge, the action is no longer
invariant under either general extended gauge transformations or under
supersymmetry, but itisinvariant under supersymmetry transformations,
which take us out of Wess-Zumino      gauge, followed by suitableextended
gauge transformations that take us back to Wess-Zumino         gauge. (We
will go into this explicitlyin Section 27.8.) As we shall now see, it is
also invariant under the ordinary gauge transformations (27.1.2)-(27.1.4),
which preserve Wess-Zumino     gauge.
  With the gauge superfieldsatisfyingthe Wess-Zumino       gauge condition
         itbecomes
(27.1.18),           relativelyeasy to calculateitsbehavior under ordinary
infinitesimalgauge transformations. In this case, Q>A(x+) are left-chiral
superfieldsof the form (26.3.11),but with no xpf or ^-components, and
with ^-components given by realinfinitesimalfunctions AA(x):


   QA(x+) = AA(x) + l-(dy5y,0)d»AA(x) - A (eyse)2UAA(x).         (27.1.20)

To calculatethe product of exponentials in the transformation rule (27.1.4),
we use a version of the Baker-Hausdorff formula:

                                   • —                   •
exp(a)exp(X) exp(6) = exp \X + Lx   (b a) + (Lx coth Lx) (b + a) H   1,
                                                               (27.1.21)
where a, 6, and X are arbitrarymatrices,Lx is the operator

                            Lxf=     L[X,f],                     (27.1.22)

and '•••'here denotes terms of second and higher order in a and/or b. In
our case we have

 b + a = 2 £ tA Im A^(x+) = -i
                               (Oysy.e) £ tA d»AA(x),
            A                            A
                                         r        1           9       '
 b-a = -2i^tAReAA(x+)       =
                               -2iY,tA                         aAA(x)
                                         \AA(x)--(dysd)
           27A Gauge-Invariant Actions for Chiral Superfields              119


 X = -lY,tAVA(x,0)        =
                              -2Y,tA      Uey5y»e)vt(x)

                                                   1/^
                              -i(dy5o)(dlA(x))--(dy5o)         DA(x)

Now, every term in X involves at leastone factor of Oi and at leastone
factor of Or, while a + b has just one factor of Oi and one factor of Or,
so we can drop any terms in Lx coth Lx of second or higher order in
Lx- Since L^cothLx     is an even function of Lx, thismeans that we can
replace itwith  itsterm of zeroth order in Lx, which is just unity. Also,
we may drop the term in b — a proportional to (OysO)2,since when acted
on by Lx itwould yield at leastthree factorsof either Oi or Or. Thus the
argument of the exponential on the right-hand side of Eq. (27.1.21)may
be replaced with

X+   \[X,b-a]+b      + a = -lY,tA         Va(x,0) + Y,CabcVb(x,0)Ac(x)
                                                    BC

                               +
                                   \i(dy5yfl0)d»AA(x)

Thus for infinitesimalgauge transformations, the transformation rule
(27.1.4)yields

  VA(x,0) -► V\x,0) + Y,CAbc           VB(x,0)Ac(x) + U{dy5yfi0)d^AA(x).
                      BC
                                                                (27.1.23)
It is important to note that under ordinary gauge transformations, a
gauge superfieldin Wess-Zumino gauge remains in Wess-Zumino       gauge.
In terms of the component fieldsin Eq. (27.1.19),Eq. (27.1.23)reads
                      -
               K^         £ CV         V*(x) Ac(x) + d,AA{x)           (27.1.24)
                          BC

               ^(x)^£cVA*)Ac(x),                                       (27.1.25)
                        BC

               Da(x)-^'£cAbcDb(x)Ac(x).                                (27.1.26)
                        BC
We recognize Eq. (27.1.24)as the usual Yang-Mills gauge transformation
rule (15.1.9)of a gauge field,while Eqs. (27.1.25)and (27.1.26)tellus that
the fieldsXA(x) and DA(x) transform as 'matter'fieldsthat belong to the
adjoint representation of the gauge group. The Majorana spinors XA are
known as gaugino fields,while the real scalars DA will turn out to be
another set of auxiliaryfields.
120                     27 Super symmetric Gauge Theories

  Next we must evaluate the matrix T that is needed in constructing
gauge-invariant functions of chiral superfields. Because all terms with
more than four factors of 6 vanish, the expansion of the exponential is
very simple in Wess-Zumino  gauge:

      r(x,0) = exp(-2£f^(x,0))
                        A
             =
                 i-i(h5y>o)'ZtAvt(x)
                                A

                 -Uhs       r e) (ey5 ? e) £ tA tB vfa)        vvB(x)
                                           AB

                 +2t                             +              £^w.
                        (d75e)Y/tA    (oaa(x))       Ue75e)2
                                A                                A
We  can construct a gauge-invariant density by multiplying this on the
right with a column vector of left-chiral
                                        superfieldsof the form (26.3.11):

         *„(*, e) = Ux)      -                +
                                 y/2(dy>nL(xj) sFn{x) (e (^^)           ej
                                             - 4
                        +\ (hsy^Mx)                  (oyso) (e MlW)


                        -^(ey5e)2D<t>n(x),
and multiplying on the leftwith the column

         <t>H{x,oy= <fH(x)-y/2(wIjx)o)        +KW        (e (^^)        0)




The term in this product of fourth order in 0 is

             =                          +
 Vr*]^                                      [(^Wl
                 -|(Sy50)2|[^n^]

                 +(

                 +-


                 -\(ey5y"e)(ey5fe)[d^dv(f>}
          27.1 Gauge-Invariant Actions for Chiral Superfields                          121




                                                      v*v*    Ut ti4tB J
             -\(W          e) fa?       e) E
                                           /IB
             -2i                                           ^ (S Vl)]
                   (0757,10) E      ^       [(»)

             -nj2(pyso)        £        [(vie) ^ (e*1)^]

             -2/V2 (flys^) E            K       (^)        ^ (5 Vl)]




in which we use square brackets to indicate scalar products in the flavor
indicesn,m, and continue to use round brackets to indicatescalarproducts
in Dirac indices. Just as in Section 26.4, we may use the identities
(26.A.17)-(26.A.19)to put all 6 dependence in the form of an over-all
factor (6y50)2:

              =                                       ~
    [<DtrO>]04 (0y50)2i -l[^D<t>]                         \[(D^)<(>}

                                                -
                   +4 [(wy^m)]                      4 [((d„VL)y" vl)]



                                        -
                   +5L E V} [*f tA d»<t>] \L E V} [(&>&) tA <t>]
                        A                     A


                      AB                                        A




                   +^EM^^]}-

The D-term is the coefficientof — \(9ys0)2 minus                       \U acting on the 0-
independent term, which for [O^TO] is [$Vl> so



                                            +
                   -[(wrVt)]                    [((W?mvl)]              +2[&&]
122                    27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

                      -2i £ V}                    + 7X £ V}
                               [tf tA d^}                   [(drf) tA 4>]
                           A                            A

                      -2£                           + u£
                                 vf vB>[<p tA tB <!>}                v£ [(wiy'tA va)}
                            AB                               A
                      +2iV2      £ [(wtA*A)(l>\-2ij2Yl                       [^ (^    Vl)]
                                  A                                  A

                      -2Y,DA[4!tA<l>].
                          A
To see that thisis gauge-invariant,we note that it may be written as

                  =
      i[*tr*]|>        -[(D^)tDv]

                                              +                                  +
                       -\[(wy»Dm)}                \[({D^)ytixpL)}                    [&*]
                       +ij2 E [{wltA^]-i^Y,                              [<P (&tAVL)]
                             A                                   A

                       -5>A[<^</>],                                                    (27.1.27)
                          A
where D^ is the gauge-invariant derivative(15.1.10):

 D^xpl = d^L-i^tA                Vf xpL ,    Drf = d^-i^tA                      V* cj>.(27.1.28)
                       A                                                 A
Eq. (27.1.27) is thus a suitable gauge-invariant kinematic Lagrangian
for the scalar and spinor components of a left-chiralsuperfield,now
supplemented with Yukawa couplings of gaugino fieldsto the scalar and
spinor components of chiralsuperfieldsas well as terms involving auxiliary
fields^n and DA.



      27.2   Gauge-Invariant          Action for Abelian Gauge                  Superfields

We must now consider how to construct a gauge-invariant supersymmetric
action for the gauge superfields VA(x,6) that contain the gauge fields
Vfi(x). In order to motivate this construction we will firstconsider the
case of a singleAbelian gauge field(dropping the superscriptA\ and then
return to the general case in the next section.
  In an Abelian gauge theory like quantum electrodynamics, the gauge-
invariant fieldconstructed from Vp(x) is the familiar field-strengthtensor
                                                  - dv
                              /jiv(x)= W*)               W       .                      (27.2.1)
The supersymmetry           transformation rule for /^(x) is then given by the
       27.2 Gauge-Invariant Action for Abelian Gauge Superfields       123

transformation rule (26.2.15)for Vp(x) as
                                       -
                        Sftiv= (a(5^v    3v^)A)
                                                  .                (27.2.2)

Eq. (26.2.16)gives the transformation rule for X(x) as
                    M =                  + i75     a
                          (" J/^v[?",7v]       D) ,                (27.2.3)
while Eq. (26.2.17)gives the transformation rule for D(x):

                           6D =                   .                (27.2.4)
                                      i[ay5 fa)
None of this depends on whether or not the superfieldVA(x,6) is taken
to be in Wess-Zumino gauge. We see that the fields/^(x), A(x),and D(x)
form a complete supersymmetry multiplet.
  It is not hard to construct a suitable kinematic Lagrangian density
for the fieldsof this supermultiplet. The only Lorentz-invariant,parity
conserving, and gauge-invariant functions of these fieldswith
     four  are f^f^, 1 PK and D2. We can make V^ a conventionally
dimensionality
normalized vector fieldby taking the coefficientof f^f^ to be — \, so we
may tentativelytake the kinematic Lagrangian density as
                           "            "              ~ CDD2 ,
                ^gauge =       J/^f         CX(1 fa)
with coefficientsex and Co to be determined from the condition that
                                                         an
/^gauged4* is supersymmetric. Using Eqs. (27.2.2)-(27.2.4),
infinitesimal
     supersymmetry   transformation changes the operators in the
Lagrangian
         by

              s(Uvr)=2r(Hyvd,-y,dv)l),
                        =                 yv] +iy5D] fa) ,
                d(lfa)     2(a[+j/^^,
                    5D2 =
                           2iD^ay5 fa) ,
in which we drop derivativeterms that do not contribute to the variation
of the action.In order to see how these terms cancel,itis necessary to use
an identityfor gamma matrices*

          [yv,/] f = -2r\Mf       + W         - 2ie^P<7y(7y5
                                                           .       (27.2.5)
The term —ie^^f^iayaysdpX)      does not contribute to fd4x b<£, because
integratingby parts yieldsa contribution proportional to e^^dpf^, which

*To derive
           this,use the factthatany 4x4 matrixmay be expressedas a linear
 combinationofthe16 independent  covariant
                                         matrices        inSection5.4,which
                                                 described
 in our caseislimitedby Lorentzinvariance and spaceinversion
                                                           invarianceto the
 termsshown here.The coefficients
                                ofthesetermscan be calculated
                                                           by giving\x\pthe
 values121and 123.
124                     27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

vanishes for an f^ of the form (27.2.1).This identitythen allows us to
rewrite the variation of the A-term as

           5 (k         = -f»v             -             + 2iD                .
                  $k)            (a(yvd,       y,dv)k)           (ay5 $k)

The cancellation of terms proportional to f^k requires that q = 1/2,
while the cancellationof terms proportional to Dk requiresthat c/>= —q,
so the supersymmetric Lagrangian density takes the form

                             = - \f^r          -
                                                   \ (l $k) + \D2 .                   (27.2.6)
                   ^gauge

This shows that with V** canonically normalized, the fieldk related to
V** by the transformation rules (27.2.2)and (27.2.3)is also canonically
normalized.
  In addition, for Abelian gauge theories there is a superrenormalizable
term, known as a Fayet-Iliopoulosterm:2

                                   &fi = £D,                                          (27.2.7)

with £ an arbitraryconstant. Itsvariation under a supersymmetry
transformation
           is shown by Eq. (27.2.4)to be a derivative,so that it yields
another supersymmetric term in the action.As we willsee in Section 27.5,
the presence of such a term can provide a mechanism for the spontaneous
breakdown of supersymmetry.
  Both for itsown interestand as a tool in constructing supersymmetric
interactionsinvolving the fields/^v, K and D, itis interestingto ask what
sort of superfieldhas these as component fields.Somewhat surprisingly,
itturns out to be a spinor superfieldWa(x), with component fields(in the
notation of Eq. (26.2.10))given by

          C(«)(x)= ka(x),
                  =
          <°(*)fi(x)                               + (yse)*pD(x),
                     K?V6)a/^00
                  =
          VMfi(x) -idti(y5k(x))^                                                      (27.2.8)
                    - i                                          -
          M(a)(x) =     (?ysA(x))a
                                   ,                 N(a)(x)=        (W^))a
                                                                                  >
                  = Di0L)(x)= 0.
          A(*)p{x)

(The subscript a on these component fieldsis put inside parentheses to
emphasize that it labels the whole superfield.)It is straightforward to
use Eqs. (27.2.2)-(27.2.4)
                         to check directlythat the superfieldcomponents
given by Eq. (27.2.8)do transform  as in Eqs. (26.2.11)-(26.2.17).
  Inserting the component fields (27.2.8) in Eq. (26.2.10) and using
       27.2 Gauge-Invariant Action for Abelian Gauge Superfields                 125

Eq. (26.A.5),we find that the superfieldWa takes the form

     Wa(x,0)=    h(x)+   tyYef^M-iysODix)-                 \{eTed) 0y5X(x)

                +
                    {{eTey5e) w+           i(0V0)y5<y(x)

                -\(eTed)y5yYy<'edafllv(x)

                +                                                   •       (27.2.9)
                    \i(fe6)y<Jed<TD{x)-        \(9TeofuX{x)\
                                                               Ja
As we showed in Section 26.3, a superfieldlikethis with zero k- and D-
                   —
components ischiral that is,itisthe sum of left-chiral and right-chiral
superfields
                      W(x, 6) = WL(x, 6) + WR(x, 0).                       (27.2.10)
Here the left-and right-chiralsuperfieldsare simply the projectionsof W
on the subspaces with y$ = +1 and ys = — 1, respectively:

 WL(x,6)=     ±(l+y5)W(x,e)
            = XL(x+) + lyV0l/„v(*+)        +                        - i9LD(x+),
                                               (eTLeeL) ?XR(x+)
                                                                           (27.2.11)

 WR(x,6)={(l-y5)W(x,e)
         = A*(x_) + iyfORf,v(x-)           -                        - i9RD(x-),
                                               (0ReeR) ^l(x-)
                                                                           (27.2.12)
with x£ given by Eq. (26.3.23).
  As we saw in Section 26.3,we can construct suitableLagrangian
    from the ^-term of any scalarfunction of a left-chiral
densities                                                superfield,plus
itsHermitian adjoint.The simplest scalarfunction of the left-chiral
                                                                  super-
field(27.2.11)is T,<xpe<xpwL<xWLp.To calculatethe J^-term, we note that,
when expressed as a function of 0l and x+, the term in Ylap 6<xP^L(xWlp
of second order in 6l is
                             =                                      +
    -[Y,€-pWL,WLp]       L       (0le0L)[-2(xl(x)e^R(x))                D2(x)]
       <*p

                                               f] [yp, yG]eL) /,v(x)/p,(x).
                                 +y6 (W,
(The argument of the fieldshere can be taken as x^ rather than x^. because
the differencewould yield terms that contain at leastthree factorsof 0l,
which therefore vanish.) Lorentz invariance together with the fact that
(s[yn,yv]s)and (siy^yvhss) vanish for any Majorana fermion 5 tellus
126                      27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

that the bilinear (Ol^, yv] [yp>ya]^L) must be proportional to a linear
combination of (MlJOW       *-
                                fj"V') and (ML)^vpff. We can find the
coefficientsby giving pvpa the values 1212 or 1230, and in this way we
find that
                                    =                   - rj^r,™ + iTVp          +            •
         (0L [y",yv] [y<>,y°]0L)        4(ff£eL) [                                    i^pa]
The ^-term       isthe coefficientof (OlOl), so

 -                             =                        ~              +                  + D2 .
         [Ee^WuWL,]                -2(lR      Hr)           \f^r           ^'hvfpc
                                                                  (27.2.13)
Eq. (26.A.21) shows that (X #A) is real,while (X $y$X) is imaginary, so the
real part of Eq. (27.2.13)yieldsthe Lagrangian (27.2.6)for the gauge and
gaugino fields

     "                                  =                    -              +         . (27.2.14)
          \ K*[E€*eWuWLfi\j                  -\ (X $X)           \f^            \d2

The physical significanceof the imaginary part willbe discussed in a more
general context in the next section.
  There is another way to derive the form of the spinor superfield,
which will turn out to provide a more convenient way of deriving the
components of the gauge superfield in non-Abelian gauge theories. A
tedious but straightforward calculation shows that the gauge-invariant
superfield (27.2.9)may be expressed in terms of the gauge superfield
(27.1.16)as

                          Wa(x90) =                              V(x,6),                 (27.2.15)
                                            ^{sTeSi)sa
where 3)^ isthe superderivativeintroduced in Eq. (26.2.26):




This resultmight have been obtained (asidefrom the normalization factor)
by noting that the function (27.2.15)has the desired property of being
a gauge-invariant chiral spinor superfield.First,note that Eq. (27.2.15)
is a superfield,because it is formed by acting on the superfield V with
superderivatives.Also, itfollows from the anticommutation of the 2)s that
the product of any three or more Q)]j>or three or more S>rs vanishes, so
that
                           =                        +                       •            (27.2.16)
               (sFeQ)Q         (®le®i))®R               (®\e®R)®L
Because @l(@Ic@l)          = @R{@\e@R)          = 0, the superfield(27.2.15)is chiral,
         27.3 Gauge-Invariant Action for General Gauge Superfields                127

with

WLoL(x96) = l-(®\e®R)        2LoL V(x, 6), WRoL(x,0)=l- (®\e®i)           9RoL V(x, 6).
                                                                (27.2.17)
Finally,we can show that (27.2.15)isinvariantunder the generalizedgauge
transformation (27.1.13),which for a single Abelian gauge superfieldis
simply

             v(x9e)^v(x,e)        +                                          (27.2.18)
                                      l[a(x,e)-ar(x9e)],
where Q(x, 6) is an arbitrary left-chiralsuperfield.Since Q)\££ = 0, the
change in W^ is proportional to (^6^k)^loA        But @R£l = 0 and

                                   = -2     +
                  L\{®\e®R)9 9LA J      L[(1 y5) 0@R] Ja ,
so the change in W^   vanishes.A similarargument shows that WR(X isalso
gauge-invariant. (The work of checking Eq. (27.2.15)is greatly reduced
by using this gauge-invariance property to put V(x,Q) in Wess-Zumino
gauge.)
  The chiral superfields(27.2.11)and (27.2.12)are evidently not of the
most general form for left-and right-chiralsuperfields.To put the
constraints
        satisfiedby these superfieldsin a manifestly supersymmetric form,
we note by using the anticommutation relation(26.2.30)that
                        =                      + y5)        +
e«p@L*(@h@R)@Lp              ~29Ra9Lp(6(1              fj       (®\e®R)     (&[e&L)
                        =                              .                     (27.2.19)
                      eap2Ra(9le2L)2R^
From Eq. (27.2.17)it follows then that Wl           and WR       are related by the
constraint
                                         =
                            eofiQu WLp       e^9RoL WRp .                    (27.2.20)
Itisstraightforwardto show that the most general chiralspinor superfields
satisfyingEq. (27.2.20)are of the form (27.2.11)and (27.2.12),with fa
constrained to satisfythe 'Bianchi'identitiese^^dpf^  = 0.



   27.3     Gauge-Invariant      Action for General Gauge           Superfields

Our experience in the previous sectionwith supersymmetric Abelian gauge
theoriessuggests immediately that in a general non-Abelian gauge theory
the kinematic Lagrangian for the fieldsVj*(x)9XA{x\ and DA(x) should
appear as part of the gauge-invariant generalizationof Eq. (27.2.6):

   ^gauge = -i£/W7-                   i£(^«Mk)+             iX>^«             (27.3.1)
128               27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

We are now using a basis for the Lie algebra with totallyantisymmetric
structureconstants,and we are consequently not preserving the distinction
between upper and lower group indices,writing allindices A, B, etc.as
subscripts.Also, /^v isthe gauge-covariant field-strengthtensor

               Uv» = hy*>      -d*vA»    + EcabcVb»VCv         ,   (27.3.2)
                                           BC
and D^X is the gauge-covariant derivativeof the gaugino field,which in
the adjoint representation is

                   (D^)A = d^A + J2 cabc Vb^c              •       (27.3.3)
                                 BC
The question is:does Eq. (27.3.1)yield a supersymmetric action?
  Since the Lagrangian density (27.3.1)is manifestly gauge-invariant,we
can testwhether the action is supersymmetric in any convenient gauge.
To find out whether 5ifgauge is a derivative at some point X**, it is
convenient to adopt a specificversion of Wess-Zumino     gauge in which
V%(X)  = 0. Then at X the changes in the component fieldsare given by
                       at x = X as
Eqs. (26.2.15)-(26.2.17)

                              SVAll={otyilXA)9                     (273 A)


                   Ma    =            [yv,y"l + iysDA)*,           (27.3.5)
                             (\fA,v


                             dDA = i{oiy5^A) •                     (27.3.6)

(We must set x^ in these expressions equal to X*1 after calculating the
change under a supersymmetry transformation, not before.) Also, the
non-linear terms in /^v are quadratic in the Vs and therefore at x = X
have zero variation,so at x = X

                                        -
                        dfAfiv= (a(yv3/i J^Wa)       •             (27.3.7)

With one exception, the terms in Eq. (27.3.1)and their transformations
under supersymmetry transformations are thus just a number of copies
(labelledby A) of the Abelian theory discussed in the previous section,
and thereforegive a supersymmetric action.The one exception that might
disturb the supersymmetry of the action arisesfrom the second term in
the gauge-covariant derivative(27.3.3)of the gaugino field:

                             = - i
                   ^W                £ Cabc (Ta Yb^c) ,            (27.3.8)
                                     ABC
         27.3 Gauge-Invariant Action for General Gauge Superfields              129

whose variationat x = X is

hsem     = -J                                = -\
                 J2 CABcfas       fBUc)             £ c^c(^y^c)          (ay^*).
                 ABC                                ABC
                                                                (27.3.9)
We can write the product of bilinearson the right-hand side as the sum
of two terms

                                             = XABc + YAbc ,
                      (Xo^c)     (oq^b)
with

               Xabc = J £ (TA{\ + ys)y^c) (ay"(l + ysMn) ,
                         +
                Yabc = J E P^1        ± ^Wc)        (ay"(i + ys)h).
                          ±

By using standard Fierz identitiesand the anticommutativity of the spinor
      we have
fields,

 (TA{\ ±ys)y,h)                          =
                      (a(i ±ys)y^c)          (h(i +y5)y^c)     (a(i fys)?^*),
         +                   + y5)y^c)   =
 (17(1       y5)y^)   (a(i                   (3^(1 ±y5)y„3j>) (a(i + y5)yOi).
(To derivethe firstof these relations,we note that [(l+y5)y^]ay[(l+ysty^]^
may be thought of as the a/? matrix element of a matrix depending on
d and y, and may thereforebe expanded in a linearcombination of la£,
                                   Because of the factors(1 +y5), the only
                        and (y5)a/?.
yj?> [y^y^afi*(ysy^W,
term in the expansion is proportional to [(1+ys)y*l]<xp.Lorentz invariance
and the presence of the other 1 ±y$ factortellus that thisexpansion takes
the form

         [(l+ ys)y,U[(i + ys)yfihp= W           ±ys^Ma        ± ysWhy.

To determine the proportionalityconstant /c,we may contract both sides
with (yv)yaand find k = — 1.The minus sign is cancelled by a minus sign
arisingfrom the anticommutation of Xq and a. The other Fierz identity
is proved in the same way, except that we also need to use the symmetry
property (26.A.7)for Majorana bilinears.) Hence Xabc issymmetric under
interchange of B and C, while Yabc is symmetric under interchange of A
and B. Since Cabc is totallyantisymmetric, both Xabc and Yabc make a
vanishing contribution to the sum in Eq. (27.3.9),leaving us b$?xxv = 0,
so that Eq. (27.3.1)gives a supersymmetric action,as was to be shown.
   We can understand why Eq. (27.3.1)gives a supersymmetric action by
identifyingthe superfieldthat has /a^v, Xa, and Da as component fields.
Recall that under a generalizedgauge transformation, the vector superfield
130                    27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

Va(x,6) has the transformation property (27.1.12):

             exp (-2^*a         VA(x,d)       -»■exp f -i
                                          J               J]tA£lA(x,0)    J

              x exp (~2Y,tA           VA(x,d)\ exp (+i £        tAilA(x,0)        ,(27.3.10)
                                                                              J

where ClA(x,6) is a general left-chiralsuperfield. This is not a gauge-
covariant transformation rule,because QA ^ ClA. To eliminate the factor
involving CTA,we note that CTA isa right-chiralsuperfield,so that Q>lS£a =
0, and therefore

  exp (-2£tA          VA(x,0)       ®Laexp    (+2£    ^
                                j                           ^(x,0)J

      -► exp ( -i
                    J] tAilA(x,0)) exp ( -2 £         ^ ^(x, 0)
                                                                      J

      x &U     exp If+2E«
                     +2 2^          K4(x, 6) I exp I(+■£■
                                                     +i ^_j ^Q„(x, 0)              (27.3.11)

This isstillnot gauge-covariant, because the left-superderivative
                                                                Q)^ acts
on exp(+i^i4ri4Qi4(x,0)) as well as on exp (+2^^       K4(x,0)). This is
eliminated if we follow the lead of the Abelian theory discussed in the
previous section,and define a spinor superfield

                        =
       2^2 tA WALa{x90)   J2€fiy®Rfi®Ry              apl-2^2tAVA(x9e)
         A                 py

                                 xSu^p(+2^2tAVA(x9e)\                              (27.3.12)

Because the product of any three 3>rs vanishes, WAl0L isleft-chiral
                                                     = 09                          (27.3.13)
                                 9rpWAu(x,0)
and because Q)K^Ky^LS^A      oc S)r^A = 0, WALa is gauge-covariant in
the sense that,for a generalized gauge transformation,

                       -+ exp
        2 ^ WAL*(X, 0)        (-/ J2 tA&Ai*, 0)) J2 tA WAL*(X, 0)
         A                         A              A

                                    xexp(+i£fA(x,0)).                              (27.3.14)

  To calculate the spinor superfield at a point x^ = X?, we can again
adopt a version of Wess-Zumino   gauge in which VA(X) = 0, and aftera
       27.3 Gauge-Invariant Action for General Gauge Superfields           131

straightforward calculationfind that in this gauge

       WAL(X99)       = XAL{X+) + iy*y0l                -
                                             (dliVAv(X+) 5VVAfi(X+))

                        +{eTLeeL)    0iRA(x+) - wlda(x+) .
Since WAl is gauge-covariant, at a general point in a general gauge it
must have the value

WAL(x, 9) = XAL{x+) + iyV0l          /^v(x+) + (eleOL) pXRA{x+)-
                                                        i9LDA(x+).
                                                           (27.3.15)
From this, we can construct a Lorentz- and gauge-invariant ^-term
bilinearin W


                                 ^
       "/4a0                          >4 L

                                         T"            t i/,4          (27.3.16)
                                           ^\ivpa]A JA

Just as in the previous section,the gauge-invariant Lagrangian (27.3.1)is
obtained from the real part of thisF-term:

               - i                              = ifgauge•             (27.3.17)
                     RG^eafWjiuWjiLf]^
                         Aap
What about the imaginary part? This is given by


         Aap                              A                        A
                                                                   (27.3.18)
Eq. (26.A.7)  and the  antisymmetry   of the structureconstants  show  that
(AA pyskA)  =                  so the firstterm is a total derivative,while
               \S^{XAy^ys^A\
Eq. (23.5.4)tellsus that the second term is a total derivative also. In
Abelian gauge theories,thismeans that a term like (27.3.18)would have
no effect.But as discussed in Sections 23.5 and 23.6,in non-Abelian gauge
theoriesthe existence of instanton solutions allows the density (27.3.18)
to have a non-vanishing integralover spacetime. We thereforemust allow
for the possibilityof a new term in the Lagrangian density

                     &o =                                    ,         (27.3.19)
                            -^       Im[J2e«pWALoiWALp]^
                                         Aap
where 9 is a new real parameter, and g is a gauge coupling, which can
be conveniently defined for a simple gauge group so that if tA, ts, and
tc are in the 'standard' SU(2) subalgebra of the gauge algebra used in
calculatinginstanton effects,we have CAbc = S€abc- With thisdefinition
132                   27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

of the gauge coupling, Eq. (23.5.20)gives for simple gauge groups

                        V*                          = 64*2v/g2 ,                  (27.3.20)
                                 W      £/M"
                      /'                 A
where v = 0, +1, +2,... is an integer,the winding number, which
characterizes
         the topological class of the gauge fieldconfiguration. Thus for
instantons of winding number v, the Lagrangian density 5£q contributes
a phase to path integrals,given by

                       lexp (i f d*x &0\\           = exp(h>0),                   (27.3.21)

so the effectsof 5£q are periodic in 0, with period 2n.
  It is often convenient to absorb a factor g into the gauge field,so that
the structureconstants do not depend on g, and instead the Lagrangian
density for the gauge fieldis multiplied by an over-allfactor 1/g2. In
thisnotation, the complete Lagrangian density for the gauge fieldmay be
written in terms of the rescaled gauge fieldsand structureconstants as

          ^gauge + See = -Re [^              Yl €«P W^«   WM      j
                                                                      >           (27.3.22)
                                             Aafi
where t isthe complex coupling parameter
                                 47TI 6
                            t = -y + — .                         (27.3.23)
                                  gz    In
According to Eq. (23.5.19),the contribution of instantons of winding
number v to path integralsis suppressed by a factor exp(—8^2|v|/g2),
which together with the factor (27.3.21)yields an over-allfactor

          exp IV0_^l          = p*p(f<;-)                      v^o                (27-3i24)
                        g2 i-( \ exp(27rivT*)                  v< 0



   27.4    Renormalizable            Gauge     Theories with Chiral Superfields

We will now put together the pieces assembled in the previous three
sections,to construct the most general renormalizable action for chiral
         interactingwith general gauge fields.Adding the terms (27.1.27),
superfields
        and
(27.2.7),    (27.3.1)and the superpotential terms in Eq. (26.4.5)gives the
Lagrangian density


                  V          A         /J/)               A

                                                                      + 2Re[f]r
            -j^2Elm{WALeWAL)^-52MVA]D
        27A Renormalizable Gauge Theories with Chiral Superfields            133

    =                         -
        -YPMWfu                   \ E   (^mv)n))+£*>»




        -2V2Im     ^(fA™                   + 2V2Im      ^(r^)mrt (v^r^a)^
                              (v^T^)^m


         Anm                       A              A
                       -                      +                         • (27AD
        -\ E/W2V            \L E (w^)             J^    w        E/K*
            A                   A                                 A

Here /(<£)isthe superpotential,a gauge-invariant complex function of <j)n
(but not of <j)*n)
                which the condition of renormalizabilityrequires to be a
cubic polynomial; the £4 are constants which gauge invariance requiresto
vanish except where r^ isa 1/(1)generator; the gauge-covariant derivatives
are

                      DiWl = S^xpL -*YltA         Va» Vl >               (27.4.2)
                                       A


                                     - i
                           Drf = drf    J>        Va» <l>                (27-4-3)



                              = d^A +
                     (D^U             J2 Cabc Vb^c           ,           (27.4.4)


and fAfivisthe gauge-covariant gauge field-strengthtensor

                  Saw = d^VAv -dvVA»       + J]CABcVBflVCv         .     (27.4.5)
                                             BC

  The auxiliaryfieldsenter quadratically,with field-independentconstants
as the coefficients
                  of the second-order term, so they can be eliminated by
setting them  equal to the values at which the Lagrangian density is
stationary:

                            &n = -(df{<t>)/d<l>n)\                       (27.4.6)


                           DA = tA+52<l>n(tA)nm<l>m.                     (27.4.7)
134                     27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

Using these back in Eq. (27.4.1),
                                the Lagrangian density becomes


             n

        —z E                             +
                 n
                     (vsi y"(^vi.)»)         2 En ((^vlW      v„L)


        4i:S(^^)-;i:(S)'('i-)'
          2 „m d4>nd<f>m                             \d<J)nd(t>mJ
                     dmr2
        -E
                     d<f>„

        +isj2 E (WnL (tA)nm^) <f>m~ iyfi^ 4C (^4 (^)ro»V>m£,)
              >4nm                      4wn


                                                    H A       C
                 A \           nm              /

                                                                           (27.4.8)

Lorentz invariance requires the fields\pni,/U, and /a^v to have
    vacuum expectation values, while the tree-valuevacuum expectation
vanishing
values of the (f>nare at the minimum of the potential

                                                                  \
      v(4>) = £        \m4>)\2+l^L             +5^;^)^                .    (27.4.9)
                         30n
This potentialis positive,so ifthere isa set of fieldvalues at which V((f))
vanishes, then thisis automatically also a minimum of the potential.For
V(<j))to vanish at some fieldvalue <j)n= 0„o, itis necessary and sufficient
that
                                          df(ct>)
                               ^n0 = ~                = 0                 (27.4.10)
                                         L d<j)n <j)=<j)Q
and

                            DAO = %A + ^2 (f>n0         = 0
                                              (tA)nm</>ro0                (27.4.11)

This in turn is the necessary and sufficientcondition for supersymmetry
not to be spontaneously broken, since Eq. (26.3.15)gives (<5t/;nL)vAC  =
V/2(J2r„)vAcaL,and Eq. (26.2.16)gives (8Xa)vac = i(DA)vAcy5<*-
  It is worth stressinghere that spontaneous symmetry breaking is more
difficultfor supersymmetry than for other symmetries. For most
symmetries
      of the action there will be fieldconfigurations at which the
       is unbroken and the potential is stationary,but the symmetry will
symmetry
       27.4 Renormalizable Gauge Theories with Chiral Superfields    135

neverthelessbe spontaneously broken ifnone of these configurations are
minima of the potential.In contrast,any supersymmetric field
configuration
     gives the potential a value of zero, which is necessarilylower than
the value of the potential for any non-supersymmetric configuration,so
the existenceof any supersymmetric fieldconfiguration insuresthat super-
symmetry isunbroken. As we willsee in Section 27.6,thisconclusion goes
beyond the tree approximation used in this section; it is unaffected by
correctionsof any finiteorder in perturbation theory.
  It may appear that Eqs. (27.4.10)and (27.4.11)impose too many
conditions the scalarfieldsto expect a solution,without some fine-tuning
of the superpotential.However, for a gauge group of dimensionality D,
the superpotential/((/>)is subject to the D constraints

                                            -»•                 <27A12>
                             d(pm V
                         E^rV)
                         ^             /m

for allA and all </>.Hence if (f>has N independent components, then the
number of independent conditions (27.4.10)isN — D, while the number of
conditions (27.4.11)is D, so there are just N conditions altogether.With
the number of conditions equal to the number of free variables,itis likely
to find solutions for generic superpotentials.In fact,it is more usual to
find solutions than not. For instance, for chiral scalar superfieldsin a
non-trivialrepresentation of a semi-simple gauge group we have £4 = 0,
while /((/>)can have no terms linear in the (/>„,  so both Eqs. (27.4.10)
and (27.4.11)are satisfiedfor (f>no= 0. There may be other solutions
of Eqs. (27.4.10)and (27.4.11)which break the gauge symmetries, but in
such a theory supersymmetry cannot be broken, at leastnot in the tree
approximation, and, as we shall see in Section 27.6, not in any order of
perturbation theory.
  More generally,itis easy to see that,even ifthe gauge group has U(l)
factorsand even ifthe superpotential involves gauge-invariant superfields,
ifthere existsa setof scalarfieldvalues (f)no
                                            that satisfyEq. (27.4.10),then
there isanother that satisfies
                             both Eq. (27.4.10)and Eq. (27.4.11),provided
only that the Fayet-Iliopoulos constants £a allvanish. To show this,we
note that since the superpotential/((/>)
                                       does not involve (/>*,itisinvariant
not only under ordinary gauge transformations (f>—► exp(i^i4 AAtA)(t>
with Aa arbitrary real numbers, but also under transformations with A^
arbitrarycomplex numbers. Under allthese transformations the J^-terms
in Eq. (27.4.10)transform linearly,so if 0o satisfies
                                                    Eq. (27.4.10),then so
does (f>A= exp(j£^4 A^)^-     On the other hand, the scalar product [(/>Vl
is not invariant under transformations with A^ complex, but [0A 0A]
does remain real and positive for complex A^, so it is bounded below,
and thereforehas a minimum. For £a = 0> the condition that [0A 0A] be
136                  27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

stationaryat thisminimum isjust that 0A should satisfyEq. (27.4.11).We
see then that in the absence of Fayet-Ilioupoulos D-terms, the question of
whether supersymmetry isunbroken in gauge theoriesis entirelya matter
of whether the superpotential allows solutions of Eq. (27.4.10).The same
resultapplies even in non-renormalizable theories.3
  Now letus assume that there isa set of values c/>no at which V((/>o)= 0,
so that supersymmetry is unbroken. The spin 0 degrees of freedom are
described by a shiftedfield

                              (Pn= (f>n-(l>n0-                    (27.4.13)
There is then a cross-term between cp and the gauge fields,arising from
the firstterm in Eq. (27.4.1):

                         2^1mfa<pH(tA<h)l)v^
                           nA
As shown in Section 21.1, itis always possible to eliminate this term by
adopting a 'unitaritygauge,' in which <j>nsatisfies
                                                  a constraint that makes
thisterm vanish:

                          ^lm(^(^^0);)=0.                         (27.4.14)
                           n
This will have the effectof eliminating the Goldstone bosons associated
with broken gauge symmetries.
  We shall now work out the masses of the particlesof spin 0, spin
1/2, and spin 1 that arise in this theory if supersymmetry is unbroken,
taking into account the possibilitythat the gauge symmetries may be
spontaneously broken.


                                  Spin 0

Because df(<f>)/d<l>n
                    and £A + Enm <t>n(^)nm (f>mmust both vanish at (f>n=
0„o> the terms in      of
                  V((/>)  second order in cpn= <j)n
                                                  —
                                                        and/or cp*nare of
                                                    c/>no
the form
        =                       + Yl
VqUad((t>) YiW^)nm(pn<Pm
           nm                               JtA<l>o) <P*n<Pm
                                      {*A<l>o)
                                  Anm

            +     5Z (tAfo) n(tA<l>0)      + X ^2                         >
                2 Anm               m<Pn<Pm        \tA^°) n{^OJ   JPnVm
                                               Anm
                                                                  (27.4.15)
where Jl is the complex symmetric matrix (26.4.11):
       27.4 Renormalizable Gauge Theories with Chiral Superfields                   137

This can be written as
                                      i r «(p it    . r «(p l
                                    — ~          Ml                             (27.4.16)
                            'quad
                                          9* J          <P* J
where M% is the block matrix

               ^*^     + ZA(tA90)(tA(l>0?              ZAitACpoKtACpo)1
   Ml =
                     ZA(tA<t>oY(tA<l>0?          JUT
                                              + EA(tA<t>Oy(tA<po)T
                                                                (27.4.17)
Now we must look for the eigenvalues of this mass-squared matrix.
DifferentiatingEq. (27.4.12)with respect to <j>„gives

              E                                                                 (27.4.18)
                   d^nd^r,
But as we have seen, d/(0)/30m vanishes at (f>= 0o, so by setting(f>at
thisvalue in Eq. (27.4.18),we find

                                   J2J?nm(tA(l>0)m=0                            (27.4.19)

It follows that

                               =                                    tB<j>0   '
         Mi
                  ±(tB<hr           J2{^tAtB±tBtA^0)            L ±(tB<hY  J
But the vanishing of Da at <f>= 0o and the global gauge invariance of £4
tellus that
                  =                    = -*                                     = 0.
   (4iltA, tB]<l>o) iY, c**c (^o'c to)      (^Jto) S                    c^c£c

                                                                (27.4.20)
The matrix (27.4.17)therefore has a pair of eigenvectors for each gauge
symmetry

    u=         T,BcBtB<l>0 1                v=
                             '                                                  (27.4.21)
              Ell <* (toM* J                      -£*<*(**       to)*
for which

                            Mlu = tfu,              M$v = 0,                    (27.4.22)
where /i2and ca are any realsolutionsof the eigenvalue problem*
                                                =
                            Yl (flfa > tB}<l>o)cB H2cA ,                        (27.4.23)


*The
     presenceofa factor1/2 in Eq.(21.1.17)
                                        whichdoesnot appearin Eq.(27.4.23)
                                                                        is
 due toa difference
                  intheway thatthescalarfields
                                             arenormalized.
138                  27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

with the exception that ifthe eigenvalue i? vanishes then Y,b cBtB(f>o= 0,
so that the eigenvectors u and v are absent. The massless particles
     with the v eigenvectors are Goldstone bosons, which are eliminated
associated
from the physical spectrum by the unitaritygauge condition (27.4.14).In
addition to these mass eigenstates,there isanother setthat are orthogonal
to allthe us and vs and that thereforetake the form
                                               c
                                   W+ =                                  (27.4.24)
                                              +r
where
                                                   = 0.                  (27.4.25)
                               E^^o);Cn
                                n
Eq. (27.4.19)shows that the space of £s satisfyingEq. (27.4.25)isinvariant
under multiplicationwith the Hermitian matrix Jt^Jt, so it is spanned
by the eigenvectors of this matrix, satisfying
                                   jfljlt>=ntt>                          (27.4.26)
with m2 a set of real positive(or zero) eigenvalues. Eq. (27.4.26)and its
complex conjugate together with Eq. (27.4.25)show that w+ are
    of M\ with eigenvalues m2:
eigenvectors

                                   Mlw±   = m2w+ .                       (27.4.27)
We thus have two self-charge-conjugatespinlessbosons of each mass m
satisfyingEq. (27.4.27),and one self-charge-conjugatespinless boson of
each non-zero mass \isatisfyingEq. (27.4.23).



                                      Spin 1/2

The fermion masses arise from the non-derivative terms in Eq. (27.4.8)
that are of second order in the fermion fieldsxpn and Xa :
                1
          =                               ~                              + H.C.
   ^1/2       -^^^nmiwlh^mL)                  lS/5$^i0o)m   (^LAe Wmh)
                  nm                              Am
                                                                         (27.4.28)
We saw in Section 26.4 that ifthe fermion mass term in the Lagrangian
for a column x of Majorana spinor fieldsis put in the form

                               =          + H.c.,             (27.4.29)
                       •*i/2
                           -\ {xhMXL)
then the fermion squared masses are the eigenvalues of the Hermitian
matrix M^M. Eq. (27.4.28)gives the elements of the matrix M here as

     Mnm = Jinm , MnA = MAn = iy/2(tA<l>o)n   > mab = 0 , (27.4.30)
      27.4 Renormalizable Gauge Theories with Chiral Superfields      139

for which, using Eqs. (27.4.19)and (27.4.20),

              (M^M)nm   = {Jt^Jt)nm


              (M*M)nA=(M*M)An    = 09                            (27.4.31)
              (M^M)Ab = 2(<t>ltBtA<l>o)
                                    = (4i{tB, tA}<fo)

The eigenvectors of the matrix (27.4.30)are of three types. Firstare those
of the form

                                z=    c
                                      0                          (27.4.32)

with eigenvalues m2, where £„ and m2 are any eigenvectors and
         eigenvalues of M^M. Next are those of the form
corresponding
                                      0
                                g =                              (27.4.33)

with eigenvalues /x2,where cb and /x2are any eigenvectors and eigenvalues
of the matrix (^Jl^B > ^}0o)- Finally,there are those of the form

                          h=     Efi CBtB(f>0
                                      0                          (27.4.34)

with eigenvalues //2,where cb and fi2 are again any eigenvectors and
eigenvalues of the matrix ((^{tB, ^}0o)- The only exception is that the
eigenvectors c of this matrix with eigenvalue zero have Y<AcAtA<i>o= 0,
corresponding to unbroken symmetries, so that in this case the vector
(27.4.34)vanishes and we have only the eigenvector (27.4.33).Thus there
is one Majorana fermion of each mass m satisfyingEq. (27.4.26),two
Majorana fermions of each non-zero mass \isatisfyingEq. (27.4.22),and
one Majorana fermion of zero mass for each unbroken gauge symmetry.



                                  Spin 1

The mass terms in the Lagrangian for the gauge fieldsarisefrom the part
of the firstterm in Eq. (27.4.1)that is of second order in the gauge field


                   &v   = -                                      (27.4.35)
                              YsMtinMtinVAnV*.
                              nAB
Since the fieldsVa^ are real,their mass-squared matrix is the matrix in
Eq. (27.4.23):

                        (»2)ab = (<f>l{tB,
                                         tA}^o)                  (27.4.36)
140                 27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

There isone spin 1 particleof mass \ifor each eigenvalue i? of the matrix
(27.4.36).

  Putting this all together, we see that for each eigenvalue m2 of the
matrix Jt* Jt there are two self-charge-conjugatespinlessparticlesand one
Majorana fermion of mass m; for each non-zero eigenvalue of the matrix
l?AB there are one self-charge-conjugatespinless boson, two Majorana
fermions, and one self-charge-conjugatespin 1 boson of mass \i\and for
each zero eigenvalue of this matrix there is one Majorana fermion and
one self-charge-conjugatespin 1 boson of zero mass. It is not surprising
that the particlemultiplets for each zero or non-zero mass are just the
same as we found by directuse of the supersymmetry algebra in Sections
25.4 and 25.5. What is a bit surprising is that the masses of the gauge
and chiral particlesare unaffected by each other. The masses m that are
given by eigenvalues of {Jt*Jt)nm and the particleswith these masses are
just what they would be in a theory of chiral superfieldswithout gauge
superfields,and the masses \i that are given by eigenvalues of i?AB and
the particleswith these masses are just what they would be in a theory of
gauge superfieldswith no chiral superfields.

  For future use in Section 27.9 we willnow apply the method described in
Section 26.7 to construct the supersymmetry current for the
   gauge Lagrangian (27.4.1).In the gauge used earlier,an infinitesimal
supersymmetric
supersymmetry transformation changes Va, K, and Da by the amounts
(27.3.4)-(27.3.6). Adding the Noether supersymmetry current given by
Eq. (26.7.2)for these fieldsto the Noether current for (/>n, xpn,and &n
already given in Eq. (26.7.8),with derivativesreplaced by gauge-invariant
derivatives,gives the totalNoether supersymmetry current:



      "> = EfAvyM                                     -          da yiynA
                        -1     E/^&'.y*]^                 ^£ A
            A                   A

                  E   [2 W)"      V«l + 2 (D»4>)»y>nR + (P4>)ny»ipnR
             +^
                             - ^n y^nR      ~               ■           (27.4.37)
             +(P<t>Yny*V«L                      K   V^nl]


This isnot the supersymmetry current, because the Lagrangian density is
not invariant under supersymmetry; instead,itschange isthe derivative


                               5jSf=                                    (27.4.38)
                                       ^(aK"),
       27A Renormalizable Gauge Theories with Chiral Superfields               141

where**


            AAA
       -i ^2(tA)nmy5y'l^A<l>*„<l>m
          Anm

                        -                 -
                            (p(f>)n\pnR       {p<f>yntpnL+ &\ WnL + &n V>nR
       W

                                                                           (27.4.39)
       «m~«m~
The firsttwo terms are derived using the identity(27.2.5).Using the same
identityagain with Eq. (26.7.4)gives the totalsupersymmetry current:



                                                    Anm
                    1



                                                                           (27.4.40)



  In Section 26.8 we considered a class of supersymmetric theorieswith
a superpotential/(O) that has an arbitrarydependence on a set of left-
chiralscalar superfields<bn but not their derivatives,and with a Kahler
potentialK(0,0*) that has an arbitrary dependence on the Q>n and O*,
but not their derivatives. We can extend the same considerations to
gauge theories,again with the dependence of the Lagrangian on the chiral
superfieldslimited only by supersymmetry, but without introducing new
superderivativesor spacetime derivatives.The renormalizable Lagrangian
density isthen replaced with

           <£ =                                           +2Re
                  ^(fl,      *W-2$>K4))]d                        [/(*)],
                                        A

                                                                           (27.4.41)


"The easiest               the change in theterm [Ofexp(—2^2A^^Wd
            way to calculate                                          isto
  calculate                                                     In thisway
          theA-componentofOf exp(—2J2a IaVa)® and useEq.(26.2.17).
  of doingthecalculation,
                       theimportanttermon thesecondlineoftheright-hand side
  of Eq.(27.4.39)
               arises
                    from theA-componentof exp(—2^2A tAVA).
142                    27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

                                         but not of the <I>*or derivatives.
where hAB(^) isa new function of the <I>„,
  The chiral gauge and scalar superfields are given by the expansions
(26.3.21)and (27.3.15):

        Wal(x,6) = XAL(x+) +                  +
                                                (6TLe8L) pXAR{x+)
                             ^yv9LfAllv(x+)
                   -idLDA(x+),
                          ~
         d>„(x,9)= <t>„(x+) y/2(eTLey>nL(x+))+ &n(x+)(dTLe9L) ,

where x£ isthe shiftedcoordinate (26.3.23).The terms of second order in
Bl (and independent of Or) in YIab hAB(Q>)(WALeWBL.) are then


       Y^hABi^W^eWsj)
       AB                          *L
                                                     _
  (0leBL)' £ V
  V           (xlLeXBL)' \\ £ V ^nLe„mL) ' *^<*>
                                            d(l>nd<l>m £^^)          Wn
           7Z            L2 ISH                        V

                                                  -
      +(ele9L)     'EhM*)]-       (XiPii-ysUs)        kwBv


                                 + DADB
                 +^livpaf^fB<r
                 dhAB(<l>)
                                                                          ,
                   W"    (01*P«l) [-{^BL^y^L)fA,v+2i(xlLedL)]
          ABn

with allfieldsnow understood to be evaluated at x^ rather than x^..(The
firstand second terms on the right-hand side are taken from Eqs. (26.4.4)
and (27.3.16),respectively.)Also, by writing 9^9^    as \eap{0\eOL), the
third term on the right-hand side can also be expressed as proportional
to (0TLeOL):

                                                             =
                  (Ol*P«l) [(wV0l)/^v-2j(w<?l)]
                                                                 .
                      \{ehBL)    [(wYv>nL)-2i(xpBy>„L)DA\

The #"-term isthe coefficientof {9\e9i), so


      -\^hABm(wJLeWBL)
        LAB
                       1   \ |1 X^ / T      \d2hAB(<f>) v^ az- dhAB(<f>)
           EAT
           AB
       21A Renormalizable Gauge Theories with Chiral Superfields                                143


          + 5>^W>)          -                -            -                 +
                                 (XA P{\         y5)XB)           -fj^fS         \*wfifS
            AB

                             +DADB


            jg^awif/^                                                                      ■
          +^E            [-(vw'VViii.)/^                            +2i(y)BV>nL)DA]
               ABn d<f>„

The other terms in Eq. (27.4.41)are just given by the gauge-invariant
version of the Lagrangian density (26.8.6).Putting this together gives the
Lagrangian density

 j£f= Re^„m(</>,0*)             - -         P(l+ y5)wn) + ^«^              -
                                      (W                                        D^n D»<t,'m


      -2Re£^^W^-


                 d<t>id4>)
                     d3K(<M*) /_
      -ReE                    TyWnWmLJ^}
                            d<j)
                nml d(f)n
                        d(j)m

      +**E                    7          D^n
                nml d(j>„   d(j)(Vm/VVK)
                        d(j>m
                      d'K(ct>,(t>')              w_           x
      + 1^                        (_


                 d2/(0) (^
          ^S(«-)+2Re^"                                            d<f>„

                                                       "                                dhAB{<t>)
      +       £ (^")                                              Re £
          5R< ABnm              (»-0         S ^n ^m          i          (*»)*■           d(t>n
                                                                     ABn

      + Re^/i/4B(4>) -           -         +
                                   l-fAliVfB                                        +
           AB
                       [kA PXBR)             ^ W/27f                                    \daDb

                A                                                                          .
            +           E -^ ^n                                      +
                TRe                        [-(r»WH*)f*»                  2i(TBrpnL)DA}
                        ABn
                                                                                           (27.4.42)
 One interestingfeatureof thisresultisthe appearance of a gaugino mass
in theories with ^-dependent functions hAB(</>),when supersymmetry
is broken by a non-vanishing value of 3Fn. This mechanism is used to
144                 27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

generate gaugino masses in some theories of gravitationallymediated
supersymmetry breaking, discussed in Section 31.7.



      27.5   Supersymmetry   Breaking in the Tree Approximation
                                   Resumed

We saw in the previous sectionthat ifthe Fayet-Iliopoulos constants £4 all
                                                                 = 0, then
vanish and ifthere existsa solution of the equations df (</>)/d</>n
there is also some solution of these equations where the D-components
of the gauge superfieldsallvanish, so that supersymmetry isunbroken. It
follows that there are only two (non-exclusive)ways that supersymmetry
can be spontaneously broken in the tree approximation in renormalizable
theoriesof gauge and chiral superfields:the superpotential /((/>)may be
                                                                      = 0,
arranged so that there are no solutionsof allthe equations df (<!>)/d</>n
or for gauge groups with 1/(1)factorsthere may   be Fayet-Iliopoulos terms
in the action.
   We have already seen in Section 26.5 how it can happen that there
might not be any value of (f>for which 3/((/>)/3(/>„= 0. No change in that
discussion isneeded when the chiralsuperfieldsinteractwith gauge fields,
so let'sturn to the other possibility:
                                     spontaneous supersymmetry breaking
produced by Fayet-Iliopoulos terms. Since this can only arise for gauge
groups with 1/(1)factors,the simplest case is a theory with a single 1/(1)
gauge group. As discussed in Section 22.4, to avoid 1/(1)-1/(1)-1/(1)  and
l/(l)-graviton-graviton  anomalies itis necessary that the sum of the 1/(1)
quantum numbers of allleft-chiral   superfieldsand the sum of theircubes
should vanish. We will consider the simplest possibility:two left-chiral
superfields0+, with 1/(1)quantum numbers ±e. (This isa supersymmetric
version of quantum electrodynamics, with the spinor components y>-L
and \p+L of the two superfieldsproviding the left-handed parts of the
electronfieldand of itscharge conjugate.)The most general l/(l)-invariant
superpotential in a renormalizable theory is just f(Q>) = mO+0_.       The
scalar potential(27.4.9)for the scalar components <p± of these superfields
is then

   7(0+, (/>_)= m2\cf>+\2         +
                        + m2\cf>-\2   +       -            .
                                    ({ e2\<j>+\2 e2\cf>-\2)2 (27.5.1)
Unless the Fayet-Iliopoulos constant £ vanishes,itisevidently not possible
to find a supersymmetric vacuum with V = 0. For £ > m2/2e2 or
£ < —m2/2e2 the potential (27.5.1)has a minimum        with either </>+= 0
           =
and \(t>-\2 (2e2Z-m2)/2e4 or 0_      =  0 and |0+|2  =  (-2e2£ - m2)/2e4,
so the 1/(1)gauge symmetry is broken along with supersymmetry. For
|£| < m2/2e2 the minimum      of the potential is at (/>+= (/>_= 0, so
   27.5 Supersymmetry Breaking in the Tree Approximation Resumed 145

here the gauge symmetry is unbroken. There is in general no necessary
connection between the possible breakdown of supersymmetry and of
gauge symmetries.
  Whether supersymmetry is spontaneously broken by the Fayet-Ilio-
poulos mechanism discussed here or by the O'Raifeartaigh mechanism of
Section 26.5 or by some combination of the two, supersymmetry leaves a
remnant in the pattern of tree-approximation masses. Inspection of the
Lagrangian (27.4.8)for a general renormalizable supersymmetric theory
of gauge and chiral superfieldsshows that the spontaneous breakdown
of supersymmetry in thistheory produces the following correctionsto the
masses calculatedin Section 27.4.



                                 Spin 0 Masses

If the ^-terms 2Fn = —{df {<}))/d<j)n)*do not vanish at the minimum
0o of the potential,then the terms in the potential of second order in
cpn= (f>n
        — (f>n0
              have additional terms beyond those listedin Eq. (27.4.15):

        =                            + J2
VqUad((p) J2(^*^)nm(Pn<Pm                  fato) n(tA<fo)m<Pn<Pm
          nm                           Anm

           +                             + ~ ^2                              >
               2 ^2 yAfo) n(tA<l>0)
                                  m<Pn<Pm        Y^0)        n(**$<>)JPnVm
                 Anm                         Anm

           +           ■Arnm(Pn<Pm+ 9 S ^*nm<M>m
               2 £nm                  nm
           + J2 DA0(tA)nm<Pn<Pm>                                      (27.5.2)
             Anm
where Ji is again the complex symmetric matrix (26.4.11):

                                 _ ( Pm        \


Jfnm is a new ingredient


                  ^nm^-E^o(j]f^l,)                           ,        (27.5.3)

and 3Fo and Dao are again the ^-terms and D-terms of the chiralscalar
and gauge superfieldsat the minimum of the potential:

       &n0 = -                       9   DaO = %A + ^2 ^nO (tA)nm</>m0•
                       d(f>nJ 0=00                  nm
146                  27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

Ifwe write the quadratic part (27.5.2)of the potentialin the form (27.4.16):
                                            it
                               — ~     (P        Mi     (P
                       Jquad
                                     L<P*
then, instead of Eq. (27.4.17),we now have the scalarmass matrix
              JCJt   + 3? + T,ADA0tA                     & + JT*           1
      Ml =
                         r + jr                  J?J?*+rf'+ZAl>AOtl
                                                                           (27.5.4)
where
             s/ = Y^(tA<Po)(tA<Po)*,             & = Y,(tA(Po)(tA(po)T■




                               Spin 1/2 Masses

The fermion mass matrix M here is given again by Eq. (27.4.30):

        Mnm = Jinm ,     M„A = MAn = i\/2(tA<Po)n
                                                >             mab   = 0.

However, now instead of Eq. (27.4.19),the gauge invariance condition
(27.4.18)yields
                                 =
                 Y, M™ (tA<P0)m Y, ^mO(tA)mn ■               (27.5.5)
                  m                 m
Thus the Hermitian positive matrix whose eigenvalues are the squared
masses of the fermions is given by

               (M^M)nm    = {Jt^Jt)nm + 2                          ,
                                                  ^2(tA<t>o)n(tA<Po)m

               (M^M)ab     =               ,                               (27.5.6)
                               2(<pltBtA<P0)




                                Spin 1 Masses

The squared masses of the vector bosons are again given by the eigenvalues
of the matrix (27.4.36):

                         (H2)AB = (</>o>{fB>^}0o)                          (27.5.7)

  With the exception of the D-terms in Eq. (27.5.4),allof the changes in
the mass-squared matrices are in theiroff-diagonalcomponents. Therefore
   27.5 Supersymmetry Breaking in the Tree Approximation Resumed 147

             (27.5.6),and (27.5.7)yield particularlysimple resultsfor the
Eqs. (27.5.4),
tracesof these matrices: for spin 0
                   = 2Tr {Ji*Ji) + Tr//2 + 2
         TvMl                                  ^ ZWTr       ^ ,        (27.5.8)
                                                A
and for spin 1/2

                      Tr (AffM) = Tr(J?*J?) + 2Tr/x2 .                 (27.5.9)
Since the trace is the sum of the eigenvalues,we obtain from thisa mass
sum rule:

  ^ mass2-2          ^    mass2+   3 ^ mass2 =-2^           D^oTrr^ . (27.5.10)
 spin0             spin1/2          spin1               A

The trace of tA automatically vanishes unless t^ isa 1/(1)generator, and,
as mentioned in Section 22.4,the trace must also vanish (when taken over
allleft-handed fermions) for 1/(1)gauge generators to avoid gravitational
contributions to an anomaly that would violateconservation of the 1/(1)
current.Thus (27.5.10)leads to the simpler result4
                                                        = 0.
         ^ mass2-2          ^    mass2 + 3 ^ mass2                    (27.5.11)
        spin0             spin1/2         spin1
Of course, the unbroken conservation of charge, color, and baryon and
lepton numbers prevents the mass matrices from having elements linking
particleswith differentvalues of these quantum numbers, so all these
resultshold separately for each set of conserved quantum numbers.
  The sum rule (27.5.11)is often quoted as providing evidence against
models in which supersymmetry is spontaneously broken in the tree
approximationwithin the minimum supersymmetric extension of the
      model. We willdiscuss this along with other arguments in Section
standard
28.3.
  As already observed in Section 26.5 (and discussed in greatergenerality
in Sections 29.1 and 29.2),the spontaneous breakdown of supersymmetry
necessarilyentailsthe existenceof a massless fermion, the goldstino. For
renormalizable gauge theories in the tree approximation, the goldstino
fieldg appears as a term in the spinor components xpnand Xa of the chiral
and gauge superfields,with coefficientsgiven by
                              '" ,    XAL = &A0 gL + ''' ,
       WnL = i^fe^nO gL +                                             (27.5.12)
where the dots denote terms involving spinor fieldsof definitenon-zero
mass. To check thiswe have to confirm that (iyJl^no, Dao) isan
       the fermion mass-squared matrix M^M
eigenvector
    of                                         with eigenvalue zero. For
this purpose we willneed to use the condition that the potential(27.4.9)
148                     27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

is stationary at (f>= (f>o:
                dV
                            =                                       •
                                                 *«* + E DAo((t>ltA)n       (27.5.13)
                                -J2^™
                d(t>n0=^0          m                    /4
We also need the gauge invariance condition (27.4.12),which at (f>= 0o
reads
                                                       = 0.                 (27.5.14)
                                  £^o(^o)n
                                   n
Combining       Eqs. (27.5.13)and (27.5.14)with Eqs. (27.5.5)and (27.5.6)then
yields

            m                                A                  A
                                                                            (27.5.15)
and


      m                                 nm                          B
                                                                            (27.5.16)
That is,

                                MtM                   \=0,                  (27.5.17)
                                         j »V^o

as was to be shown.



           27.6      Perturbative Non-Renormalization            Theorems

From the beginning, several of the ultravioletdivergences in ordinary
renormalizable quantum fieldtheories were found to be absent in the
supersymmetric versions of these theories.With the development in 1975
of supergraph techniques,in which allparticlesin each supermultiplet are
considered together,itbecame possible to show that some radiative
corrections
      are not only finite,but are absent altogetherin perturbation theory.5
Supergraphs   willbe  described  in detailin Chapter 30, but as it happens
they are not needed  to prove the most important non-renormalization
        This sectionwillgive a version of a method developed by Seiberg6
theorems.
in 1993, which showed how the non-renormalization theorems may be
easilyobtained from simple considerations of symmetry and analyticity.
  Consider a general renormalizable supersymmetric gauge theory with
a number of left-chiralsuperfieldsOrt and/or gauge superfields Va- As
mentioned in Section 27.3, ifwe remove the factor g in the tA and Cabc
and include itinsteadin the gauge superfields,then the Lagrangian density
             27.6 PerturbativeNon-Renormalization Theorems               149

willbe of the form

   <e =                +2Re            +    *Re                          ,
          [<lfie-v*]          [/(*)]              [ J2eapWAaL   WApL}^
                                                                 (27.6.1)
where the superpotential /(O) is a gauge-invariant cubic polynomial in
              superfields.(We are ignoring a possible 0-term, which has
the left-chiral
no effectin perturbation theory.)
  Suppose we impose an ultravioletcut-offX on the momenta
    in loop graphs. As discussed in Section 12.4, we can find a local
circulating
'Wilsonian'effectiveLagrangian density JS?^that, with this cut-off,gives
preciselythe same resultsas the originalLagrangian density for 5-matrix
elements of processes at momenta below X. The effectiveLagrangian
density has masses and coupling parameters that now depend on X, and
usually there willbe an infinitenumber of coupling terms in the effective
Lagrangian density,all possible terms allowed by the symmetries of the
theory. But things are much simpler in supersymmetric theories. The
non-renormalization theorems tellus that,as long as the cut-offpreserves
supersymmetry and gauge invariance,to allorders in perturbation theory
the effectiveLagrangian willhave the structure

               Sek = [^(*, *f, V, 9 •••)] + 2 Re [/(*)]&
                                        D




where s/x is a general Lorentz- and gauge-invariant function; '^•••'
denotes terms involving superderivatives or spacetime derivativesof the
preceding arguments; and gx is the one-loop effectivegauge coupling,
given by the same formula as the one-loop renormalized gauge coupling
constant

                                           — 2b InX ,
                         g^2 = constant                              (27.6.3)

where b is the coefficientof g3 in the Gell-Mann-Low        function j?(g),
discussed in Chapter 18. This is for a simple gauge group, with a single
gauge coupling, but the extension to a direct product of simple and 1/(1)
gauge groups istrivial.Note in particularthat the effectivesuperpotential
isnot only finitein the limitX —► oo, but at leastin perturbation theory it
contains no terms beyond those in the originalsuperpotential,and there
isno change in the coefficients of the terms itdoes contain.
  To prove this theorem, we shall interpretthis theory as a special case
of one with two additional external gauge-invariant left-chiral
                                                              superfields
150                   27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

X and Y, with Lagrangian density

 jS?«= 1                + 2Re                +                 W^   WApL
           [tfe-"*^             [y /(<&)]^       ^Re [* $>«,
                                                                 (27.6.4)
This Lagrangian density becomes equal to the originalone when the scalar
components x and y of X and Y are given the values x = 1/g2 and y = 1,
and the spinor and auxiliarycomponents of X and Y are set equal to zero.
Since supersymmetry and gauge invariance are assumed to be preserved
in the cut-offprocedure, the effectiveLagrangian density in the presence
of these external superfieldsmust be the sum of the D-term of a general
superfieldand the real part of the ^-term of a left-chiral
                                                         superfield:

 A    =
          \^x{<!>,<i>\V,X,X\Y,Y\g>---)\           +2RQ\@X{®,    WL,X,Y)]^,
                                                                   (27.6.5)
with six and Six both gauge-invariant functions of the displayed
arguments.
       We do not include any superderivativesor spacetime derivativesin
the ^-term because, as in Section 26.3,terms involving derivativesof any
                 superfieldsor their adjoints may be rewritten as
of the left-chiral
        to [s/x\d-(Itis true that Eq. (27.3.12)gives Wi itselfin terms of
contributions
two 3>rs acting on a superfieldexp(—2V)@>Lexp(2V), but this superfield
isnot gauge-invariant,and we are requiring that six be gauge-invariant.)
  The dependence of Six on X and Y is severelylimited by two additional
symmetries of the action obtained from the Lagrangian density (27.6.4).
(Both of these symmetries are broken by non-perturbative effects,which
will be considered in Chapter 29.) The firstsymmetry is a perturbative
1/(1)/^-symmetry, of the sort discussed in Section 26.3, for which Qi and
Or are given the R values +1 and —1, the superfieldsO, F, and X are
/?-neutral,and Y has the R value +2. (Recall that /> is the coefficient
of Q\ in /, so in order for /> to have the R value 0, / must have the
R value 2.) Because Wl is given by two @>rs and one 3)^ acting on
/?-neutralsuperfields,ithas the R value +1. Now, R invariance requires
&x> like the superpotential,to have the R value +2. It cannot depend
on any superfieldswith negative R values, such as adjoints of left-chiral
superfields,because itis holomorphic, so the terms in &x can only be of
firstorder in Y or of second order in Wl, with coefficientsdepending
only on the /?-neutralsuperfieldsO and/or X:

      >,WL,X,Y)=Yfx(®,X)+             J2 CapWAtLWBfiLhjLABMX).         (27.6.6)
                                     <xpAB
(Lorentz invariance requiresthe spinor indiceson the W^s to be contracted
with 6a£.) The other symmetry is translation of X by an imaginary
numerical constant, X —► X + i£,with £ real.This changes the Lagrangian
            27.6 PerturbativeNon-Renormalization Theorems                 151

density (27.6.4)by an amount proportional to Im Y^Arf ^AaL^Afiu which
as we saw in Section 27.3 is a spacetime derivative,and therefore can
have no effectin perturbation theory. This translationsymmetry prevents
X from appearing anywhere in the effectiveLagrangian density (27.6.5)
except where it appears in the original Lagrangian density (27.6.4).We
thereforeconclude that fx is independent of X9 while h^AB consistsof a
(^-independent term proportional to X5ab, plus a term that isindependent
of X. That is,

 ax(<l>9WL9X9Y) = Yfx(<l>)+ J2 e«pWA«LWBpL          [cxbABX
                                                              +
                                                                  hABm]    ,
                            afiAB
                                                                  (27.6.7)
where q isa real cut-off-dependent constant.
  The point of introducing the external auxiliarysuperfieldsX and Y is
that,by giving them suitablevalues, we can make use of weak-coupling
approximations to determine the coefficientsin Eq. (27.6.7).If we set the
spinor and auxiliarycomponents of X and Y equal to zero, and take their
scalar components x and y to approach infinityand zero, respectively,
then the gauge coupling constant vanishes as l/^/3c,and allYukawa and
scalarcouplings derived from the superpotential vanish as y. In thislimit,
the only graph that contributes to the term in (27.6.7)proportional to Y
has a singlevertex arisingfrom the term 2 Re [Yf(Q>)]p in Eq. (27.6.4),so

                            /,(<D)= /(<D).                            (27.6.8)
Also, with Y = 0 there is a conservation law which requires every term
in JS?Jto have equal numbers of Os and O^s, so since & cannot occur in
Sxab* neithercan O. Gauge invariance then requires the constant ^xab to
be proportional to Sab for a simple group:

                            tiAB = SabU   •                           (27.6.9)
Now, since gauge propagators go as l/x while pure gauge interactions
go as x and scalar propagators and interactionsare x-independent, with
y = 0 the number of powers of x in a diagram with Vw pure gauge boson
vertices,Iw internalgauge boson lines,and any number of scalar-gauge
boson verticesand scalar propagators is

                           Nx = Vw-Iw        -                      (27.6.10)
The number of loops is given by

                     L = Iw+I*-Vw-V*             + \9               (27.6.11)
where /<&is the number of internalO linesand V$ is the number of Q>-V
interactionvertices.All the Q>-V verticeshave two O lines attached, so
with no external O lines 7<d and V® are equal, and therefore cancel in
152                 27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

Eq. (27.6.11),so that Eq. (27.6.10)may be written
                               Nx = l-L.                         (27.6.12)
Thus the coefficientc\ of X in Eq. (27.6.7)is correctlygiven by the tree
approximation and is therefore what it was in the original Lagrangian,
simply ex = 1, while the coefficientL\ of the X-independent term is given
by one-loop diagrams only. Putting thisalltogether,we have
            =
       ^1       ^((D,(Dt,F,X,Xt,y,yt,^---)]D+2Re[y/((D)]
                    1
                                                                 (27.6.13)
                  +2Re
                                  Aap               \9
where Lx is the one-loop contribution.Setting Y = 1 and X = 1/g2 then
gives Eq. (27.6.2),with gj2 = g~2 + L^. As shown in Section 18.3, the
leading order contribution to Xdgx/dX isthe same function of gx whatever
renormalization scheme is used to define this coupling, so to one-loop
order we must have

                             Xdgk/dk = bg\9                      (27.6.14)
where b is the same coefficientof g3 as in the renormalization group
equation of Gell-Mann and Low. The solution is Eq. (27.6.3),completing
the proof.
  In theorieswith a 1/(1)gauge superfieldV\9 the Lagrangian may contain
a Fayet-Iliopoulos term (27.2.7):

                             -SPfi= «[Ki]d.                      (27.6.15)

It is easy to see that the coefficient£ of such a term isnot renormalized.7
If the corresponding coefficient& in the Wilsonian Lagrangian density
did depend on the gauge couplings or the couplings in the superpotential,
then when we replace the originalLagrangian (27.6.1)with a Lagrangian
(27.6.4)involving the external superfields X and Y, this term in the
Wilsonian Lagrangian would be required by supersymmetry to take the
form

                               k(*,y,<r,y*)7i]D,                 (27.6.16)

with & a function with a non-trivialdependence on X and/or Y and/or
their adjoints. But such a term would not be gauge-invariant, because,
according to Eq. (27.2.18),a gauge transformation shifts V\ by a chiral
               —
superfieldi(Q fl*)/2, and although the D-term of a chiral superfield
vanishes,the product of /(Q —Q*)/2 and & isnot chiralfor general gauge
transformations if & has any dependence on other superfields. There
actually are diagrams that make contributions to & that are independent
            27.6 PerturbativeNon-Renormalization Theorems             153




Figure27.1. A one-loopdiagram thatcould be quadratically
                                                       divergentintheories
with supersymmetry broken by trilinear
                                     couplingsamong  scalarfieldsand their
        The
adjoints.   linesallrepresentcomplex scalarfields.



of allcoupling constants.For the Lagrangian (27.6.1)there are no factors
of the gauge coupling g at verticesat which the gauge superfieldinteracts
with chiralmatter, but instead a factor g~2 for each gauge propagator, so
a graph with no internal gauge linesand no self-couplingsof the chiral
superfieldwillhave no dependence on coupling constants.The only such
graphs that contribute to & are those in which a single external gauge
lineisattached to a chiralloop. (See Figure 27.1.)The contribution of all
such graphs is proportional to the sum of the gauge couplings of allchiral
superfields— that is,to the trace of the 1/(1)generator. But as discussed
in Section 22.4,thistrace must vanish (ifthe 17(1)symmetry is unbroken)
in order to avoid gravitationalanomalies that violatethe conservation of
the 17(1)current.
  The most important application of these theorems isa corollary,which
tellsus that ifthere isno Fayet-Iliopoulos term and ifthe superpotential
                                                = 0, then supersymmetry
f(Q>)allows solutionsof the equations df\<j))/d<j)n
isnot broken in any finiteorder of perturbation theory.
  To test this we must examine Lorentz-invariant field configurations,
in which the Q>n have only constant scalar components <j)nand constant
auxiliarycomponents ^n, while (in Wess-Zumino       gauge) the coefficients
Va of the gauge generators ^ in the matrix gauge superfieldV have only
auxiliarycomponents Da- Supersymmetry is unbroken ifthere are values
of (f>n
      for which S£x has no terms of firstorder in 3Fn or Da, in which case
there issure to be an equilibrium solution with lFn = Da = 0. (In Section
29.2 we willsee that thisisthe sufficient
                                        as well as the necessary condition
for supersymmetry to be unbroken.) In the absence of Fayet-Iliopoulos
terms, thiswillbe the case iffor allA


                                              = 0               (27.6.17)
                       £^#AfcW;
154                27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

and for alln

                               ^=0,                              (27.6.18)

                                             is
where the effectiveKahler potentialKx(<f>9<l>*)
                               = ^(M',0,0-      •
                     Kxfap)                      •),             (27.6.19)
with j/;i(0,0*,O,O-••) obtained from six by settingthe gauge superfield
and all superderivativesequal to zero. (With superderivatives required
to vanish by Lorentz invariance, the only dependence of s/x on F is a
factor exp(— V) following every factor <!>*.)
                                            We now use a trick that we
have already employed in Section 27.4. If there is any solution 0(o) of
Eq. (27.6.18),then the gauge symmetry tellsus that there is a continuum
of such solutions,with (f)nreplaced with

                     ^(z)=[exp(/^^z^)l          <^0),            (27.6.20)
                                    A
where (since/ depends only on <f>9 not <f>*)
                                           the za are an arbitrary set of
complex parameters. If           has
                       Kx{(j>9<i>*)  a stationary point anywhere on the
          =      then at that point
surface <f> <f>(z)9

 0 = 2^             {tA)nm<PmOZA - ^              (WwmQm   3zA • (27.6.21)
               ^                           ^

Since thismust be satisfiedfor allinfinitesimalcomplex 5za, the coefficients
of both Sza and bz\ must both vanish, and therefore Eq. (27.6.17)as
well as Eq. (27.6.18)is satisfiedat this point. Thus the existence of a
stationary point of A^(0,0*) on the surface <f>= (f)(z)   would imply that
supersymmetry is unbroken to all orders of perturbation theory. The
zeroth-order Kahler potential(0ty) isbounded below and goes to infinity
as (f>—► oo, so it certainlyhas a minimum on the surface <f>= <f>(z)9where
of course itis stationary.If there were no flatdirectionsin which Kx is
constant at thisminimum then any sufficiently     small perturbation to the
Kahler potentialmight shiftthe minimum, but would not destroy it.At
the minimum of the Kahler potential on the surface <f>= c/>(z)    there are
flatdirections:ordinary global gauge transformations d(/>= iJ2A$zAtA<l>
with za real. But these are also flat directions for the perturbation
           —
Kx(<j>9<j>*)(0ty)> so there is stilla local minimum of Kx on the surface
   =
(f> (f>(z) for any perturbation in at leasta finiterange, and thus to all
orders in whatever couplings appear in Kx{<j)9<l)*). As we have seen, this
is a set of scalar fieldvalues at which ^n = 0 and Da = 0 for alln and
A9 which means that supersymmetry isunbroken.
                                    * * *
                    27.7 Soft Supersymmetry Breaking                     155

  These resultsmay be extended to non-renormalizable theories.3In such
theories the firstterm [<tfe~vQ>]D in Eq. (27.6.1)is replaced with the
D-term of an arbitrary real gauge-invariant scalar function of O^, O, F,
and theirsuperderivativesand spacetime derivatives,while the second and
third terms in Eq. (27.6.1)are replaced with the ^-term of an arbitrary
globallygauge-invariant scalarfunction /(O, W) of <bnand Wa. Ithas been
shown that, to all orders of perturbation theory, the function fx(Q>,W)
appearing in the ^-term of the Wilsonian Lagrangian is the same as
/(O, W\ except for the one-loop renormalization of the term quadratic in
W.



                27.7    Soft Supersymmetry      Breaking*

We will see in the next chapter that, even if supersymmetry is an exact
symmetry of the action, the spontaneous breakdown of supersymmetry
at very high energy can produce superrenormalizable terms that violate
supersymmetry conservation in the effectiveaction that describes physics
at lower energies.These superrenormalizable terms may explain the lack
of supersymmetry observed in phenomena at accessibleenergies. In this
sectionwe willconsider the radiativecorrectionsthat can be produced by
such supersymmetry-breaking superrenormalizable terms, in part to see
whether this provides a criterionfor including or rejectingsuch terms in
supersymmetric versions of the standard model.
  The sign of supersymmetry breaking is the appearance of expectation
values of D-terms of general superfieldsor ^-terms of chiral superfields.
Any operator e(9 in the Lagrangian density that breaks supersymmetry
can be written in a supersymmetric form, as a D-term

                              €0 =                                   (27.7.1)
                                     [ZS]D,
where S is a non-chiral superfield that has (9 as its C-term, and Z is
a non-chiral external superfieldwhose only non-vanishing component is
[Z]o = e. Some but not all operators e(9 that break supersymmetry can
also be written as ^-terms,

                              €& =                                   (27.7.2)
                                     [Q0]^,
or their adjoints,where 0 is the left-chiralsuperfield whose ^-term is
0 and Q is an external left-chiralsuperfield whose only non-vanishing
component is [Q]jr = e. We can count the order in e in which a given

* Thissectionlies omewhat out of thebook'smain lineof developmentand may be
  omittedina first
                 reading.
156                27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

correction to the effectiveLagrangian will occur by counting the powers
of Z or Q needed to construct thiscorrection in a supersymmetric way.
We will find interestinglimitationson the radiativecorrections that can
be produced by those interactionsthat can be written in the form (27.7.2)
as well as (27.7.1).
  According to the resultsof the previous section,there are no radiative
corrections to ^-terms, so all supersymmetry-breaking radiative
      to the Wilsonian Lagrangian density must take the form of D-terms.
corrections
This theorem does not prevent any given operator from appearing in the
Wilsonian Lagrangian density,because even if an operator eAS£ cannot
be expressed in the form [ZA]/>, where A is the general superfieldwhose
C-term is A<£, yet e2A5£ can be expressed in the form

                          e2A&   =             .                  (27.7.3)
                                     2[Q*QA]
But not all operators can be produced by radiative corrections of first
order in Q or Q*. In particular,a function only of the 0-term of a
left-chiralsuperfieldO, but not of <£*,cannot be written as the D-term
of a superfield linear in Q. (Note that [Q/i(0)]/>is a derivative,while
[Q*ft(0)]/>= 2[O]jrdft(0)/30 is not a function of <j>alone.) We conclude
then that the supersymmetry-breaking terms in the Wilsonian Lagrangian
that depend on <j)alone cannot be produced by radiativecorrectionsthat are
of firstorder in supersymmetry-breaking interactionsof the form (27.7.2).
   This resultissignificantbecause the most divergent radiativecorrections
are those that are of lowest order in superrenormalizable couplings. To
be more specific,the coefficientof an interaction of dimensionality 2
has dimensionality (in powers of energy) 4 — 3>9 so dimensional analysis
indicatesthat the contribution of a set of interactionsof dimensionality
d\, di, etc. to the coefficientof an interaction of dimensionality d can
contain the ultravioletcut-offto at most a power

                  p = 4 - d - (4 - d\) - (4 - di)                 (27.7.4)
and isthereforefiniteifp < 0. (This argument ignores possible ultraviolet
divergences in subintegrations;for a thorough treatment of this topic,see
Reference 8.)Superrenormalizable interactionsare 'soft,'  in the sense that
they  reduce the degree of divergence of the graphs in which  they appear.
In particular,in a renormalizable theory where allinteractionshave di < 4,
and the strictlyrenormalizable interactionswith di = 4 are
     the contribution of one or more superrenormalizable interactionsto
supersymmetric,
the coefficientof an interactionwith d = 4 willalways have p < 0, so even
if they are not supersymmetric the superrenormalizable interactionswill
not produce supersymmetry-violating ultraviolet-divergentcorrections to
the coefficientsof the supersymmetric d = 4 interactions.
           27.8 Gauge-Invariant Supersymmetry Transformations            157

  On the other hand, in such a theory there may be divergent radiative
correctionsto the superrenormalizable interactionsthemselves.9The most
worrisome are quadratic (or higher) divergences, which ifcut off at some
high energy scale Mx may require a fine-tuning of the bare coupling
constants to preserve supersymmetry as a good approximate symmetry
at energies below Mx.      According to Eq. (27.7.4),in renormalizable
theorieswhere allinteractionswith d\ = 4 are supersymmetric, radiative
corrections can produce quadratic or more highly divergent (p > 2)
supersymmetry-violating operators of dimensionality d only ifthey involve
insertionof a superrenormalizable supersymmetry-violating interactionof
dimensionality d\ > 2 + d. This allows either d = 0 and d\ > 2, which
arises only when we calculate the cosmological constant, or d = 1 and
d\ = 3, which arises only when we calculate the 'tadpole'graphs in
which a scalar fieldline disappears into the vacuum. The cosmological
constant raises fine-tuning problems for all known theories10and will
not be considered further here. The tadpole graphs represent operators
linear in <j>or 0* and, as we have seen, can not be produced to first
order in supersymmetry-violating interactions that can be put in the
form (27.7.2).Such superrenormalizable interactionsare therefore 'soft'
in the sense that they do not induce quadratic or higher divergences.
Along with the superrenormalizable interactionswith d < 2, including
arbitraryquadratic polynomials in <j>and 0*, the supersymmetry-breaking
interactionsthat are soft in thissense include terms of third order in the
0, which can be expressed as 03 = [Q03]jr, and likewise terms of third
order in the 0*, and also d = 3 gaugino mass terms, which can be written
as [O.e^W^Wfi]^, but not terms like 020* or 002*, which in general can
produce quadraticallydivergent tadpole graphs.9
  Nevertheless, tadpoles can only arise for scalar fieldsthat are neutral
with respect to all exact symmetries. In theories without such neutral
scalars,like the supersymmetric standard model discussed in the next
chapter, all superrenormalizable interactions may be considered to be
soft.



    27.8    Another Approach: Gauge-Invariant         Supersymmetry
                             Transformations*

Itissomewhat disturbingthat the supersymmetry transformation rules
       so far involve ordinary spacetime derivatives,not gauge-invariant
discussed

* Thissectionlies omewhat out of thebook'smain lineof developmentand may be
  omittedina first
                 reading.
158               27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

derivatives.For instance,in a 1/(1)gauge theory,the transformation of the
component fieldsof a chiral scalar superfieldis given by Eqs. (26.3.15)-
(26.3.17)as

                    SxpL = yfid^yVaiR <j>
                                        + VI^aL       ,
                    5& =                                         (27.8.1)
                           y/2(aLftpL)9
                       =
                    6<j) V5(oSvl) •

One might have thought that in the transformation of a chiral super-
fieldthat carries 17(1) charge q, the ordinary space time derivatives in
Eq. (27.8.1)should be replaced with gauge-covariant derivatives,given in
terms of the (7(1)gauge fieldV^ by

                                =                                (27.8.2)
                           Dp       dp-iqVp.

With such gauge-invariant supersymmetry transformations of the chiral
superfields,one would stillattempt to formulate supersymmetry
transformations
        of the gauge supermultiplet that involve only the physical and
auxiliaryfieldsV^ X, and D:

                      5Vfl= (ay^) ,

                      $X = iDy5a +                               (27.8.3)
                                      ^[dlly9y'l]*9
                      3D = i(ay$ $A\ ,

in which ordinary spacetime derivativesappear because the gauge super-
fieldcarriesno 17(1)charge.
  This doesn't work. The algebra of these transformations does not close:
the commutator of two of the modified supersymmetry transformations
isnot a linearcombination of bosonic symmetry transformations, such as
spacetime translationsand gauge transformations. It follows that itisnot
possibleto construct a Lagrangian for the chiraland gauge superfieldsthat
would be invariantunder these modified supersymmetry transformations,
because if there were such a Lagrangian then it would have to be also
invariant under the commutators of these transformations, so that these
commutators would have to be bosonic symmetries of the Lagrangian.
  In 1973 de Wit and Freedman11 showed that the supersymmetry algebra
could be made to close by modifying the supersymmetry transformation
properties of the chiralsuperfieldsnot only by changing ordinary
derivatives
     to gauge-invariant derivatives,but by also adding an extra term in
the transformation of the ^-component, so that for 17(1)gauge theories
          27.8 Gauge-Invariant Supersymmetry Transformations             159

the modified supersymmetry transformation rulesread



                   l&   = y]2(a[,
                                 pxpL) -2iq<j> (aEXR) ,              (27.8.4)



With this change, they were also able to construct a Lagrangian that is
invariantunder the transformations (27.8.3)-(27.8.4)   and that turned out
to be just the one we have found in Sections 27.1 and 27.2.
   There isnothing wrong with continuing to use the conventional
transformation
         rules (27.8.1),so we do not need the de Wit-Freedman formalism
to deal with supersymmetric gauge theories.Nevertheless thisformalism
is of some interest,because in supergravity theories the analog of the
conventional formalism is very cumbersome. As described in Chapter 31,
the formalism that has been chieflyused to derive physicallyinteresting
resultsin supergravity theoriesfollows an approach likethat of de Wit and
Freedman, with supersymmetry transformation rules involving covariant
derivativesin place of ordinary derivatives,rather than an approach based
on conventional supersymmetry transformations likethose of Eq. (27.8.1).
It is thereforeof some interestto understand the relationbetween the de
Wit-Freedman formalism and the conventional approach in the relatively
simple context of 1/(1) gauge theory, and in particular to explain the
origin of the extra term in the transformation rule for 3F.
   In writing supersymmetry transformations (27.8.3)that did not involve
the components C, M, AT, or a> of the gauge superfield V, de Wit and
Freedman were implicitlyadopting the Wess-Zumino        gauge discussed in
Section 27.1.But the choice of Wess-Zumino gauge isnot invariantunder
eitherthe conventional supersymmetry transformations (26.2.11)-(26.2.17)
or the extended gauge transformations (27.1.17),so once we adopt this
gauge both symmetries are lost. We can, however, define a combined
transformation, acting on fieldsin Wess-Zumino     gauge, which consistsof
a conventional supersymmetry transformation followed by an extended
gauge transformation that takes us back to Wess-Zumino       gauge. This is
the de Wit-Freedman transformation d.**
  To construct the de Wit-Freedman       transformations in this way, note
that fora gauge superfieldthat satisfiesthe Wess-Zumino gauge conditions

**Thiswas not shown
                             by de Wit and Freedman. But,in fact,althoughthe
                    explicitly
  pointoftheirpaperwas to emphasizethatthedetails of thetransformations
                                                                      (27.8.3)
  and (27.8.4)
            couldbe inferred
                           fromtherequirement  ofa closedsupersymmetryalgebra
  (alsofornon-Abeliangauge theories),they remarkedthatthey had actuallyfound
  thesetransformations
                     by identifyingthe fermionictransformationsthatsurvivein
  Wess-Zumino gauge.
160                  27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

C = M = N = o) = 0, the transformation rules (26.2.11)-(26.2.14)
                                                               give
      <5C = 0,    d(D=f(x,      <5M =                 dN =                   (27.8.5)
                                        -(oU),                i(ay5iy
According to Eqs. (27.1.17),we can get back to Wess-Zumino   gauge by
performing an infinitesimalextended gauge transformation (27.1.13):

                             V -+ F +                  ,                     (27.8.6)
                                        ^[Q-Q*]
where Q is a left-chiral
                       superfieldwith components

       *° = 0,     v>L=-^r«K>             ^Q     =
                                                     -(a(l-y5M).             (27.8.7)

According to Eq. (27.1.11),this extended gauge transformation induces
on a chiralsuperfieldof charge q the transformation
                                     = igQ<D.
                                 <5'<D                                       (27.8.8)
Using the multiplication rules (26.3.27)-(26.3.29),
                                                  the transformation of
the components of Q> is

                   d'\pL= -ijlqcj) fccR ,
                   b'P = -2iq4>         - iy/2q
                                (*ZXR)         (w fxpL) ,                    (27.8.9)
                   <5> = 0.
Adding this to Eq. (27.8.1)and comparing with Eq. (27.8.4)shows that
the de Wit-Freedman transformation isindeed the combination of a
conventional
          supersymmetry transformation and the corresponding extended
gauge  transformation (27.8.8):
                                g<D = <5<D+ <5'<D
                                                .                           (27.8.10)


        27.9     Gauge   Theories with Extended            Supersymmetry*

Theories with unbroken extended supersymmetry are not considered to
be good candidates for realistic
                               extensions of the standard model, because
of the non-chiralityof particlemultiplets discussed in Section 25.4.
          gauge theories with extended supersymmetry are worth some
Nevertheless
consideration here because they have provided paradigms for the use of
powerful mathematical methods to solve dynamical problems.
  There are a number of special formalisms that have been proposed
to construct Lagrangians with N = 2 extended supersymmetry,12 but

* Thissectionlies omewhat out of thebook'smain lineof
                                                      developmentand may be
  omittedina first
                 reading.
           27.9 Gauge Theories with Extended Supersymmetry            161

fortunatelywe can get by with the tools already at hand. Any theory with
N = 2 supersymmetry also has N = 1 supersymmetry, so itsLagrangian
must be a special case of the Lagrangians already considered in this
chapter. To construct a Lagrangian with N = 2 supersymmetry for some
set of the N = 2 supermultiplets of particlesconstructed in Sections 25.4
and 25.5, we need only write down the most general Lagrangian with
N = 1 supersymmetry whose N = 1 supermultiplets contain physical
fieldsfor the particlesin the N = 2 supermultiplets,and then impose a
discrete/^-symmetry on the Lagrangian: a symmetry that acts differently
on differentcomponents of N = 2 supermultiplets. The Lagrangian
density will then be invariant under a second supersymmetry, whose
supermultiplets are given by acting on the supermultiplets of ordinary
N = 1 supersymmetry with the /^-symmetry.
  It willbe convenient to choose the discrete/^-transformationso that

                      61-+62,          Qi-+-Qi-                   (27.9.1)
If the central charge were zero then the supersymmetry algebra would be
invariant under an 51/(2) /^-symmetry group, which has the
transformation
     (27.9.1)as one finiteelement exp(mt2/2), but symmetry under the
discrete symmetry is sufficientfor our purposes, so we do not need to
assume a zero centralcharge. In fact,itwillturn out that the Lagrangians
we construct by this method will have an 51/(2) /^-symmetry, not just
symmetry under the discretetransformation (27.9.1).
   Let us firstconsider the renormalizable theory of the gauge bosons
of a general gauge group, together with the superpartners required by
N = 2 extended supersymmetry. We saw in Section 25.4 that in N = 2
global supersymmetry theories a massless gauge boson can only belong
to a multiplet also containing a pair of massless fermions of each helicity
+ 1/2 that transform as a doublet under the 51/(2) /^-symmetry and a pair
of 5l/(2)-singletspinless bosons. Since N = 2 supersymmetry includes
N = 1 supersymmetry, the renormalizable Lagrangian for this theory
must be a special case of the general renormalizable Lagrangian density
(27.4.1).One feature of this special case is that since the gauge boson
belongs to the adjoint representation of the gauge group, so must also the
fermions and scalarfield.To furnish N = 2 supermultiplets of fieldswith
the correct particlecontent, we must have one N = 1 chiralsuperfieldQ>a
with component fields0^, xpA,&a (with \pA Majorana and (t>Aand 3Fa
both complex) for each N = 1 gauge multiplet V%, Xa.Da- We impose a
discrete/^-symmetry under the transformation

                       \i>A-*kA,      XA-+ -Wa ,                  (27.9.2)
(with allother fieldsinvariant)because thisisthe effectof the
transformation
    (27.9.1).Since a non-trivialsuperpotential would give \pA interactions
162                 27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

or mass terms that are absent for Xa9 the superpotential must vanish. The
Lagrangian (27.4.1)thereforetakes the special form


             A                              A                      A
          -2V2Re        J2 cabc (^alWcl)          <£b
                                                   B
                        ABC

          +i E cabc McDA               -
                                           J2 Z* d* + 2 S d*da
             ABC                            A            A



                                                                           (27.9.3)
where
                                =
                    (D^k            dptpA + ^     CU*C VbiWc ,             (27.9.4)

                                = 5^       + ^ Qbc             ,           (27.9.5)
                        (V)^                            Vb^c
                                             BC
                                =          + ^ Que
                    (D^             d^A                 VBli4>c,           (27.9.6)
                                             BC
and
                             -
                 /^v = 3^K4V   5,7^             + £ CabcVbvVc*         .   (27.9.7)
                                                  BC

(Recall that in the adjoint representation (tA)BC = — ICabc, where Qbc
is the real structure constant, defined as usual in this book to include
factors of gauge couplings, and taken in a basis in which it is totally
antisymmetric.) The Lagrangian density (27.9.3)has AT = 1 supersymmetry
with multiplets(t>A,V>A>& a and Fjjf,/U, D,i,because itisa specialcase of
Eq. (27.4.1),and ithas an 51/(2) symmetry relating%pa and /U, including
invariance under the finite517(2) transformation (27.9.2),so it also has
a second independent N = 1 supersymmetry with multiplets (f>A,   ^a->&a
and F£, — \pA,DA. It thereforesatisfies the conditions imposed by N = 2
supersymmetry.
  We can eliminate the auxiliaryfieldsby settingthem equal to the values
at which the Lagrangian density (27.9.3)is stationary:

                   &A    = 0,         DA = -i J2 CabcMc            •       (27.9.8)
                                              BC
(We are now assuming that the Fayet-Iliopoulos constants £4 allvanish.)
Insertingthese values back in Eq. (27.9.3)gives an equivalent Lagrangian
             27.9 Gauge Theories with Extended Supersymmetry                      163

density


               A                                  A

            +>/2 E CABC (jpE (]~^1)     4>c
                 ABC    ^    \ ^ / *a)/


                   ^BC         \         \    ^        /      /

                              -                                +
            -* E/WT                5 E       (m*>^)                |wE/:/;,
                                                                               (27.9.9)
where the potentialis

                                                  i2               r             i2
p(*,*')=4e
                    /4 BC                         J           A IBC J
                                                                (27.9.10)
This potential has a minimum value of zero, which is reached not only
for (/>a= 0 but also for any set of 0s for which YIbc Cabc $b$c = 0 f°r
allA or, in other words, for which

          [f-Re<£, f-lm0]      =0,            where          M) = ^^5.        (27.9.11)
                                                                   B
That is,the minimum of the potentialisreached for those scalarfieldsfor
which allgenerators t •Re (f>and t •Im (f>belong to a Cartan subalgebra of
the fullgauge algebra,allof whose generators commute with one another.
Though all such values of (f>give zero potential,and hence unbroken
N = 2 supersymmetry, they are not physically equivalent, as shown for
instance by the differentmasses they give the gauge bosons associated
with the broken gauge symmetries.
  One remarkable feature of extended supersymmetry is that the central
charges of the supersymmetry algebra in any state can be calculated in
terms of 'charges'in that stateto which bosonic fieldsare coupled.13 The
easiestway to do thiscalculationis to use the transformation properties
under ordinary N = 1 supersymmetry of the extended supersymmetry
currents Sf(x) with r = 2, 3,...,N to calculate the anticommutators
{6ia> Sfg(x)}. We can then calculate the central charges from the anti-
commutators

                         {6ia, Qrp} =                      {Qla, $(*)}   .    (27.9.12)
                                             jd3x
It turns out that the integrand on the right-hand side is a derivativewith
164                        27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

respect to space coordinates, but itsintegraldoes not vanish ifthe states
have fieldsthat do not vanish rapidly as x —► oo.
  To see how this works in detail,let'sconsider the case of N = 2
supersymmetry with an 51/(2) gauge symmetry and a singleN = 2 gauge
supermultiplet,with no additionalmatter supermultiplets.The Lagrangian
here is given by Eq. (27.9.3),with A, B, and C running over the values 1,
2, 3, and
                               CABC = eeABC,         £a=0.           (27.9.13)
(The coupling constant here is denoted e because thisis the charge with
which the massless gauge fieldof the unbroken 1/(1) gauge symmetry
interacts.)The usual N = 1 supersymmetry current (distinguishednow
with a subscript 1) is given by Eq. (27.4.40)as


                      4 A                           ABC

                                  (PtUy^AR       + iPPUy^AL          (27.9.14)
                     ^?
We can calculatethe second supersymmetry current by subjecting 5f to
the finite51/(2) /{-symmetry used above, which simply amounts to making
the replacements xpA —► >U, >U —► — Wa- This gives


                     4 A
                                                   ABC

                                  (PthyHAR       + WUyHAL            (27.9.15)
                     +^
It will be enough for our purposes (and somewhat easier) to calculate
only the change in the right-handed part of thiscurrent under an N = 1
supersymmetry transformation. After settingthe auxiliaryfieldsequal to
theirequilibrium values

                          &a   = 0,       DA = -ie 53 eABC<pB<$>c,
                                                   BC
we find

          =                           yW4>)A*R
  ss2r        x4 E/^[yp,
                  A

              -J2e                                  -                V*)*R
                          J; eABCy^P^AO^R^C               ^/W^W'V'
                                                           4

              -V2e    53 eABC^cipcfrUy^R            + '"
                      ABC
           27.9 Gauge Theories with Extended Supersymmetry                       165

where the dots denote terms bilinearin fermion fields,which do not
     us here because we are interestedin effectsof long range boson fields.
concern
We can combine terms by using the Dirac anticommutation relationsand
the identity

  [yp,y*] ly",f) + [y>,yv) [yp,y*] = -8^ V'                 + 8iT *T + 8 ie^y5

and find


                      A                           A
              -ijle     J2 cabcMc           (D^Uolr     + ••• .
                        ABC
In order to write thisas a derivative,we need to use the Yang-Mills field
equations given by Eqs. (15.3.6),(15.3.7),and (15.3.9):
                  = J"a                                 -               ,
           0v/r        =e^ABc((D^YBcl>c                      4>*W)c)
                           BC
           e,vpa(DvfnA=0.
These allow us to write 5S%R as a totalderivative
                                       = D^a*     ,                         (27.9.16)
                                SS$R
where




with the dots again indicating irrelevantterms involving fermion fields.
Eq. (26.1.18) allows us to write Eq. (27.9.16) as an anticommutation
relation

                                                        DVX»V .             (27.9.18)
                  {&..s&}-i[.(i^J                     a/?
Since X1" is a gauge-invariant quantity, its gauge-covariant derivative
is the same as its ordinary derivative. Also, X^ is antisymmetric, so
DyX0* = dtX0i.From Eqs. (27.9.12)and (27.9.18),we have at last

                          = i                               X<* »           (21.9.19)
           {Qr«, Qrp}           [e {j-p)]        jdSi
with the integraltaken over a large closed surface enclosing the system
in question,with surface area differential
                                         dS taken normal to the surface.
Comparing thiswith Eq. (25.2.38)gives the central charge

                            Z12 = -i [ dSt X0i.                             (27.9.20)
166                27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

If we choose a gauge in which (f>A(almost everywhere) has only the
constant non-vanishing component $3 = v, then

                 = -vEl,                        = vBl,        (27.9.21)
        Y,Sa4>a               \l J2e^fApa+A
         A                        A
where E and B are the electricand magnetic fieldsassociated with the
unbroken (7(1)subgroup of the 51/(2) gauge group. Therefore the central
charge (27.9.20)here is
                         Z12 = ly/lv [iq- m\ ,                   (27.9.22)
where q and Jl are the electriccharge and magnetic monopole      moment,
defined by

                   q=   [ dStE*9       Jt=   f dSt Bl.           (27.9.23)

As discussed in Section 23.3, this theory, with 51/(2) gauge symmetry
spontaneously broken by the expectation value of an 51/(2) tripletof
scalars,is one in which magnetic monopoles actually do occur.
   The application of the resultsof Section 27.4 to the Lagrangian density
(27.9.3)shows that, after the spontaneous breaking of the 51/(2) gauge
symmetry, thistheory willcontain elementary particlesof charge ±e9 zero
magnetic monopole moment, and tree-approximation mass M = y/2\ev\.
Specifically,for each sign of the charge there is one such particleof spin
1,  two of  them  with spin 1/2, and one with spin 0. It is a striking
consequence of the resultsobtained here that the mass value yjl\ev\ is
exact, being unaffected by eitherradiativecorrectionsor non-perturbative
effects,provided that the quantity v is defined by Eq. (27.9.22) for the
centralcharge}*
   To see this,note that the massive one-particle statesfor each sign of
the charge are 'short'N = 2 supermultiplets,which, as shown at the end
of Section 25.5,have masses that saturate the lower bound (25.5.24):
                               M = IZ12I/2 .                      (27.9.24)
Even if we did not trust the tree approximation to give us the precise
value of the particle masses, we would not expect corrections to this
approximation to turn short multipletsinto the fullmultiplets,with many
more states,that could have larger masses, so we can be confident that
Eq. (27.9.24)isexactly valid.For particleswith electriccharge q = ±e and
zero magnetic monopole moment, Eq. (27.9.20)gives Z12 = +2 yflive, so
Eq. (27.9.24)tellsus that theirmasses are
                              M = y/2\ev\.                       (27.9.25)
This is the resultfound in the tree approximation, but now we see that it
isexact.
           27.9 Gauge Theories with Extended Supersymmetry              167

  The semi-classicalcalculations described in Section 23.3 show that
electricallyneutral magnetic monopoles in this theory have monopole
strengths**
                                      4tlv
                                Jt=          ,                     (27.9.26)
                                       e
with v the winding number, a positive or negative integer. The formula
(27.9.22)for the central charge together with the inequality(25.5.24)thus
give a lower bound on the monopole masses


                             M > *b£M            .                 (27A27)
                                     \e\

Interestingly,this is the same as the Bogomol'nyi lower bound14 on
monopole energiesderived in Section 23.3."*"In fact,the monopole solution
for v = 1 that was described in Section 23.3 saturatesthisbound. More
generally, the 'dyons' of this theory,15 particleswith both charge and
magnetic moment, have masses given by16

                          M = 2\v\^/q2 + J?2,                      (27.9.28)

which again isthe minimum value allowed by Eqs. (25.5.24)and (27.9.20).
Indeed, allof the known particlesin this theory have masses given in the
semi-classical imitby Eq. (27.9.28).17
  Returning now to general N = 2 gauge theories,we may also include
additional 'matter'fieldsin the Lagrangian. For simplicity,we will
restrict
      ourselves to 'short'massive hypermultiplets (with central charge 2C
saturating the inequality(25.5.24)),each consisting of a singlefermion of
spin 1/2 and  an  51/(2) doublet of spin 0 particles,together with distinct
antiparticles.This isthe same spin content as is given under N = 1 super-
symmetry by pairs of left-chiralscalar superfieldsQ>'nand <&£, together
with their right-chiraladjoints,with the complex scalarfieldcomponents
4>'nand $J and their adjoints forming pairs of 51/(2) doublets, and the
spinor fieldsall 51/(2) singlets.(We are using primes and double primes
to distinguish these superfieldsand their components from <bA and its
components.) If some of these hypermultiplets OJ, and OJ,'are non-neutral


**Note thatthe                                                tothemagnetic
              magneticmoment Ji definedby Eq.(27.9.23)isrelated
   moment g definedinSection23.3by M = 4ng.
 + The canonically
                 normalizedfieldwitha non-vanishing
                                                  vacuum expectation valueis
                                        appearingin the Bogomol'nyiinequality
   ^/2Re03 (forrealv\ so the quantity(</>)
          isy/2v.
   (23.3.19)
168                     27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

under the gauge group, then a superpotential is allowed, of the form:**


              <D")= i S^U^X*^
      /(<D,0)',                                       + ^ E   f^X         •       (27.9.29)


To the Lagrangian density (27.9.3)we then must add a Lagrangian density
for these hypermultiplets,given by the firsteight terms on the right-hand
side of Eq. (27.4.1),and find a total Lagrangian density

* = - E w>;             w>»
                                   -
                                       bwa
                                                              -
                                                                  E(°M        (Dfl<t>h
       n                                n                          A


                n                       n
                                   -
      -\1 E (va(Pv)a)                  \Z E fcWh)
           A                               A

      +E        ^>n+E             K'K+E*a*a
            n                 n                A
      -Re                                     ~
                Yl^A)nm<t>A(WnLeWmL)               1fiRe   E CaBC (*AL€V>Cl) <t>*B
                Anm                                        ABC
      -Re                                      ~ Re
                Yi^SA)nm^„(w'mLeWAL)                  Yi^SA)nm^m(y>nLeWAl)
                Anm                                   Anm
      +2V2Im                                        + 2^2lm
                    Y^A)nm{rpleXAL)^                              E(^)»»(v2^l)C

      + Re YSSA)™4>A<Vn&"m              + ^     E^W^m-^n

      + ReE(^)«m0'„C^
           ,4nm
      + Re E /W»^                 + ^                      - Re
                                            E M»m^«^;              E 0»» (v2*V&l)
           .4nm                             .4nm                   wm


t1"
  Therestill
           cannotbe any termsinthesuperpotential thatareofsecondor higherorder
  inthe Q>Aforthesame reasonas before:suchtermswould leadto scalarcouplings
  or massesforthe \pA,with no corresponding  couplingsor massesfortheir517(2)
  partnerskA. Also,therecannotbe any term thatistrilinear  in the 0'„and/or 0'„',
  becausethentheterm in Eq. (27.4.1)involvingtheproductof fermionbilinears with
  secondderivativesofthesuperpotentialwould leadtoa couplingofthe5 l7(2)-singlet
  fermionsto 517(2)doubletfields         Thus the onlytrilinear
                                   or <$>"n.
                                <f>'n                           interaction
                                                                          terms
  inthesuperpotentialmust involveone factorof <bAand two factorsof 0'„and/or0'„'.
  Therecannotbe any trilineartermsinvolving a Q>Aand two 0'„sor two 0'„'s,
                                                                        because
  thatwould givethe517(2)singlet        fields
                                auxiliary     !Fa an interaction
                                                               with5 (7(2)-triplet
                or <\>"n<\j'm,
  products<t>'n<t>'m     and therecannotbe any bilinear  termsinvolving two 0'„s
  or two 0'„'s,
             becausethatwould yield5l7(2)-tripletmass terms(\p'^e\p'm)
                                                                    or (\plTe\p'^)
  The onlyremainingallowedbilinear or trilinear
                                              termsareof theform (27.9.29).
            27.9 Gauge Theories with Extended Supersymmetry                  169

     -                    -                          + * ^2 Cabc $b4>c1>A
         ^2(tfA)nm(t>n(t>mDA ^(^A)nm^n^mDA
         Anm                 Anm                        ABC

     -Y,Z*d*      + \T,dada




where the (t^)rtmand {t"A)nmare the matrices (includingcoupling constant
factors)representing the gauge group on the left-chiral scalar superfields
Q)'nand <!)„,respectively.The Yukawa couplings between fermions and
scalarshave a discrete/{-symmetry under the transformation

 &AL -* —WAL ,     V>,4L-* +A.AL ,      <t>n"* ~0n    >      0n "* 0n > (27.9.31)
provided that
                      5^ = -2V2      ir^T = +2V2     ir^ .              (27.9.32)
(Note in particularthat Eq. (27.9.32)requires the representations of the
gauge group furnished by OJ, and Q% to be complex conjugates.) This is
also a symmetry of allthe other terms in the Lagrangian density (27.9.30),
except for those involving the auxiliaryfields.
  It is not possible to extend the symmetry under the transformation
(27.9.31)to the auxiliaryfields,but the symmetry appears afterthe
     fieldsare eliminated.* After settingDa, ^fn, and &"n equal to values
auxiliary
at which the Lagrangian density is stationary,and combining D- and
^-terms, the Lagrangian density (with sa and t"Agiven by Eq. (27.9.32),
and £a taken to vanish) takes the form
   <e = - YHWW1*')-          -
                               E W^V)«-              E(°M      (Wh
            n                    n                    A
                      ~
  ~\ E     (¥n(PV>')n) \ E     (<(PV>")«)

                       -
  -\ EA {wa(Pvu)           \ EA (^ (px)A)

  -2 V2Im                               -
             Y,^A)mn<i>A{wlexp^L)           2V2Re    £ CABc (^al^cl)        fa
             Anm                                     ABC

* Afterelimination
                 of the auxiliary     the resulting
                                 fields,           actionisinvariantunder the
         N = 2 supersymmetrytransformation
  original                                               — thatis,onlyup to
                                            only 'on-shell'
  termsthatvanishwhen thefields                     field
                                      the interacting
                                satisfy                 equations.Thisdoesn't
  hurt,becausetherestill
                       aretwo conservedsupersymmetrycurrents  whose integrated
  time-componentsatisfytheN = 2 supersymmetryanticommutationrelations   when
          of which theyare composed are requiredto satisfy
  thefields                                               thefieldequationsof
  theHeisenbergpicture.
                      'Off-shell'
                               formulationsofN = 2 supersymmetryexist,butare
  subjectovariouscomplications.18
170                  27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

  -2 V2Im                                   - 2
               £(^W;(vCI^l)                     V2Im    ^^W^V^t)
               Anm                                      Anm
                                                                       //*
  +2V2Im       J2VA)mn(v'nLeXAL)fa         -2^Im       J^C^U^l^l)^     m
               Anm                                     Anm
                      g2e                    pa
                                             A
          A                        A
  -                                    +
      J2 &A > ^mn^A^B^n^m                  0nVm)



          A Vnm

  +                                  -
      2   5Z   cabcCade4>*b4>c<I>d<I>e 2^          E^^^w^w

  -4 Re ^(t»„m0;*^-4Re                  5>^WX*
        nm                              nm
                                                                     (27.9.33)

The  last five lines on the right-hand side come from the terms in
Eq. (27.9.30)involving auxiliary fields,and now these too are invariant
under the discretetransformation (27.9.31),provided that

                            [^^]       = [^^]=0.                     (27.9.34)

  We can now go a step further and consider the case of N = 4 extended
global supersymmetry. (As remarked in Section 25.4, N = 3 supersym-
metry isthe same as N = 4 supersymmetry.) The only massless multiplets
of N = 4 supersymmetry that do not contain gravitons or gravitinos
consist of a singleparticleof helicity1, an 517(4) quartet of particlesof
helicity1/2, and an 5(7(4) sextetof particlesof helicity0, together with
their CPT-conjugates of opposite helicity.There is one such supermul-
tipletfor each generator tA of the gauge group. These particlescan be
grouped into supermultiplets of N = 2 supersymmetry: for each tA there
is one gauge supermultiplet consisting of one particleof helicity1, two
particlesof helicity+1/2, and one particle of helicity0, together with
their CPT-conjugates of opposite helicity,plus two hypermultiplets,each
consistingof one particleof each helicity+1/2 and two particlesof
    0. The N = 2 gauge superfieldconsistsof an N = 1 gauge superfield
helicity
Va and a left-chiralscalar superfield0>a and itscomplex conjugate, while
the two N = 2 hypermultiplets consist of two additional left-chiralscalar
superfields<b'Aand <b"Aand theircomplex conjugates.
   Since N = 4 supersymmetry includes N = 2 supersymmetry, the
                  27.9 Gauge Theories with Extended Supersymmetry                  171

Lagrangian density after elimination of the auxiliary fieldsof N = 1
supersymmetry18 must be a special case of Eq. (27.9.33),but with the
labels h, m, etc. running over the indices A, B, C, etc. of the adjoint
representation. Also, the coefficientnnm in the superpotential (27.9.29)
must vanish here, because otherwise Eq. (27.9.33)would contain terms
quadratic in the fermion fields\pfAand \pA,with no counterpart for their
N = 4 superpartners XA and \pA- Also setting(t'A)Bcequal to the
     —i Cabc in the adjoint representation,we find that the Lagrangian
generators
density must take the form


  <e = - YPA'UW)A                     -
                                          Y]VA")\W)a
                                                                  -
                                                                      YP^a   (d"<i>)a
          A                                A                           A
                            -
 -\ E (vftVW)                   \ £ (vSPiA*))
     A                             A


          A                       A
 -2 72 Re E                                - 272 Re
              c^bc^(vbl^cl)                           ^ c^c (^l*Vcl) 0b
          /4BC                                        ABC
 -2 72 Re E CabcVb                          - 2 72 Re
                                (wcl6XPal)             E cabc<I>c {wbl6XPal)
          ABC                                          ABC
 +272         Re E                               +272   Re £
                     Qbc(v3l^l)^c                              CAbc(v7l^al)(I>c
                 ABC                                       ABC

      A Z-^fdnvfA + ^4-26livP°Z-^fA )?A                 V >                   (27.9.35)


where the potentialis


V =     E    C^^CBC£        (0/40B + 0B0^l) (0C0D* + 0C*0£>)
      /4BCD£

      +                                   -
              £    E C^Bc(0B*0C               0B0C*)
                   BC

      — ~
                E    cabcCade4>*b4>c4>])4>e+ 2 E              ^Cabc&b&c       (27.9.36)
              /4BCD£                                          BC


  With no further constraints needed, this Lagrangian has an 517(4) /?-
symmetry, which implies that itisinvariant under AT = 4 supersymmetry.
To see this,we need to use the Jacobi identityto write the cross-term in
172                    27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

the second lineof the right-hand side of Eq. (27.9.36)in the form
                                           -
    ^2 CabcCadeVb             ficfib <I>e=        ^2 cabcCade<I>'b <I>'d<I>e
                                                                         4>'c
  ABCDE                                         ABCDE
                                            -
                                                  5Z cabcCade4>'b $e$c<t>b >
                                                ABCDE
which allows us to write the potential(27.9.36)in a form symmetric among
the scalarsand their adjoints


                              +S
              YlCABC<i>*B(i>fc\       YlCABC<i>*B(i>fC +E          ^Cabc^bVc
      A       BC            I    A    BC                           BC

                ^2 cabc4>b4>'c             ^2CAbc<I>b*<I>c
          A     BC                    A     \c

                J2 CABC$B$C                 ^Cabc^bVc
          A                                 BC

                 ^2Cabc4>"b4>'c      ^£         ^CabC^B^C*                (27.9.37)
                 BC                             BC
Now to make the 51/(4) symmetry apparent, we introduce an 51/(4)
notation for the fields.We assemble the left-handed fermion fieldsinto an
51/(4) vector:

 Vial = Wal ,         Vial = *al ,        Wial = Wal >       Waal = Wal • (27.9.38)
In order for the fermion kinematic terms in the Lagrangian density to be
5l/(4)-invariant,we then must assemble the right-handed fermion fields
into a contragredient vector:
                       ,2 _                 3 — «„/
  War = War ,         War = *ar ,         War = War ,      War = War •    (27.9.39)
The Majorana        condition on the fermion fieldsthen takes the 51/(4)-
invariantform

                                 (WIAlY = -P&PAR      >                    (27.9.40)
with indices i,j9 etc.running over the values 1, 2, 3, 4. In order for the
Yukawa couplings between the fermion and scalar fieldsto be 51/(4)-
invariant,we must give the scalars the transformation properties of an
antisymmetric 51/(4) tensor

                    *i2-«.         4>A^4>A,             = -<t>A,
                                                    <t>lA4
                                                                          (27.9.41)
                    <ffi= -4*A,       *?--*?,             <tf = 4>A,
           27.9 Gauge Theories with Extended Supersymmetry              173

which also obeys an S t/(4)-invariantrealitycondition


                                              kl
The whole Lagrangian density (27.9.35)can then be written in the
      Sl/(4)-invariantform
manifestly


                      Aij

                                    +
                 -\ E (vliLeiPv'Rh)   \Z E (v&JPvtLh)
                     Ai                   At
                 -V2Re          £    Cabc^wIbl^jc^-V
                               ABCij

                                     +                      ,      (27-9.43)
                 ~\ EA /W?               J^    W   £ /r/r
                                                    A
where the potentialis


                         y-te          J2CABC4<I>C                 (27.9.44)
                                  AijklBC
The potential has a minimum value zero, so that supersymmetry is not
broken in this theory. The minimum       is reached when the generators
         aH
Y^a tA<t>lJA commute   with one another.
  For zero theta angle, the gauge theories with a simple gauge group
and either N = 2 or N = 4 supersymmetry have just a singlecoupling
constant, the gauge coupling constant g. Since these theorieshave N = 1
supersymmetry, they share the property discussed in Section 27.6, that
the only infinityin higher orders of perturbation theory is in a one-loop
correction to this coupling.** The function j?(g)in the renormalization
group equation \idgjd\i= j?(g)is then given to allorders of perturbation
theory by the one-loop formula (18.7.2),with a suitablecorrectionfor the
presence of scalarfields:


                 *»                                               (2m45)
                         —5?        (lJCl-&-&*)•


**The trilinear
             terminthesuperpotential
                                  (27.9.29) isproportional
                                                         tothegaugecoupling,
  and istherefore
                renormalized,    theno-renormalization
                           despite                     theoremofSection27.6.
  Thisisbecauseherewe arerenormalizing
                                     theleft-chiralscalar               and
                                                                 0,4,Or„,
                                                        superfields
     aswellas thegaugesuperfield
  <b"n                                                       normalized.
                              VA so as to keep them canonically         The
  bilinear
         termin Eq.(27.9.29)
                          isrenormalized forthesame reason.
174                27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

where

                  ^CabcCabd        = g C\6cd ,
                  AB
                  hv(tctD)}.
                  L                    . = g2C2/<5Cz>,
                           JMajoranafermions                     (27.9.46)

                  hi (tctD)]   , s ,   =g2c^CD.
                  L       Jcomplex calars
In general theories with N = 2 supersymmetry we have two Majorana
fermions Xa and xpA in the adjoint representation and H pairs of
Majoranafermions \p'nand \p„ whose left-and right-handed parts are in
representationswith generators either tfAor — t'AT,so
                                 = 2Ci + 2HCf2 >                 (27.9.47)
                           C[
where C2 isdefined by
                                   = g2C'2SCD-
                           Tr tfctfD                             (27.9.48)

Also, we have one complex scalar <j>ain the adjoint representation and H
                            and <$>"n
pairs of complex scalars </>fn     in representationswith generators t'A
or —trA , so

                            C\ = C\ + 2HC'2 .                    (27.9.49)
The beta function (27.9.45)istherefore

                        P(g) =                                   (27.9.50)
                                 -^-2(c1-HC'2).
The case of N = 4 supersymmetry isjust the specialcase with H = 1 pairs
of N = 2 hypermultiplets in the adjoint representation,with C2 = C\9 so
in this case the beta function vanishes. This is therefore a finitetheory,
with no renormalizations at all.19
  Gauge theories with N = 4 supersymmetry have another remarkable
property, known as duality. This was firstconjectured by Montonen
and Olive17 for purely bosonic theories in which a simple gauge group
is spontaneously broken to a U(l) electromagnetic gauge group. They
noticed that semi-classicalcalculations (of the sort described in Section
23.3)give the mass of particleswith charge q = ne and magnetic monopole
moment M = Anm/e (with n and m integers of any sign) as

                        M = V2 \v (ne+-^^                        (27.9.51)
                                                  j
which isinvariantunder the transformations

            m —► n ,       n —► —m ,        e <-*47i/e .         (27.9.52)
                                Problems                              175

On thisbasis,they suggested that the theory with a weak gauge coupling
e is fullyequivalent to one with a strong gauge coupling An/e. Neither
the purely bosonic theory nor the simplest versions of the N = 1 and
N = 2 extended supersymmetry theories reallyhave this property;20 for
one thing, the massive charged elementary vector bosons of the broken
gauge symmetries have spin 1,while allof the monopoles and dyons have
spins 1/2 or 0. (We willsee in Section 29.5 that N = 2 theoriesdo have a
dualityproperty of a more subtle sort.)But for N = 4 supersymmetry the
monopole statesform multipletswith one particleof spin 1, four particles
of spin 1/2, and two particlesof spin 0,just likethe elementary particles.20
Evidence has accumulated21 that N = 4 supersymmetric gauge theoriesare
indeed invariantunder the interchange of electricand magnetic quantum
numbers and of e with An/e. The equivalence of theorieswith large and
small coupling constants has become an increasinglyimportant theme in
stringtheory, but thisis beyond the scope of thisbook.


                               Problems

  1. To second order in gauge coupling constants, calculatethe
          of the superfieldsQA that are needed to put the gauge superfield
     components
     VA in Wess-Zumino gauge by the transformation (27.1.12).

  2. Show that the most general chiralspinor superfieldWa satisfyingthe
     condition (27.2.20)has components f^ satisfyingthe homogeneous
     Maxwell equations ^vpGdpf^ = 0. What conditions on the other
     components of Wa are imposed by Eq. (27.2.20)?

  3. Consider a general renormalizable N = 1 supersymmetric gauge
     theory with an 51/(2) gauge group and a single chiral superfield
     belonging to the 3-vector representation of 51/(2).What isthe most
     general superpotential for this theory? Construct the Lagrangian
     density of the whole theory explicitly.Eliminate the auxiliaryfields.
     Show that supersymmetry isnot broken in thistheory. What are the
     masses of the particlesof this theory?

  4. Express the gaugino and chiralfermion fieldsin the supersymmetric
     version of quantum electrodynamics described in Section 27.5 in
     terms of the goldstino fieldand other spinor fieldsof definitemass.

  5. Consider the renormalizable N = 2 supersymmetric theory with an
     51/(3) gauge symmetry and no hypermultiplets.What are the values
     of the scalar fieldsfor which the potential vanishes? What are the
     massless gauge fieldsfor non-zero values of these scalars?Calculate
176                27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

      the central charge in terms of the quantitiesto which these massless
      gauge fieldsare coupled.



                               References

  1. Supersymmetry was applied firstto Abelian gauge theorieswithout
     using the superfieldformalism by J.Wess and B. Zumino, Nucl Phys.
     B78, 1 (1974). It was then extended to non-Abelian gauge theories
     by S. Ferrara and B. Zumino, Nucl Phys. B79, 413 (1974); A. Salam
     and J. Strathdee, Phys. Lett. 51B, 353 (1974). These referencesare
     reprinted in Supersymmetry, S. Ferrara, ed. (North Holland/World
     Scientific,Amsterdam/Singapore, 1987).
 2. P. Fayet and J. Iliopoulos,Phys. Lett.51B, 461 (1974).This reference
    is reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 1.
  3. S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 80, 3702 (1998).
 4. S. Ferrara, L. Girardello, and F Palumbo, Phys. Rev. D20, 403
    (1979). This articleis reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 1. Special
    cases of thissum rule had been given by P. Fayet, Phys. Lett. 84B,
    416 (1979).
  5. M. T. Grisaru, W. Siegel, and M. Rocek, Nucl. Phys. B159, 429
     (1979).
  6. N. Seiberg,Phys. Lett. B318, 469 (1993).
  7. This was firstproved in the supergraph formalism by W. Fischler,
     H. P. Nilles,J. Polchinski,S. Raby, and L. Susskind, Phys. Rev. Lett.
     47, 757 (1981). The proof presented here was given by M. Dine, in
     Fields,Strings,and Duality: TASI 96, C. Efthimiou and B. Greene,
     eds. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1997); S. Weinberg, Ref. 3.
  8. A detailed proof of the statement that superrenormalizable terms
     that violate some global symmetry do not introduce infinite
           breaking radiativecorrectionsto the coefficientsof renormal-
     symmetry
     izable interactionsis given by K. Symanzik, in Cargese Lectures
     in Physics, Vol. 5, D. Bessis,ed. (Gordon and Breach, New York,
     1972). This isdiscussed brieflyin the footnote on p. 507 of Volume
     I.
  9. L. Girardello and M. T Grisaru, Nucl. Phys. B194, 65 (1982),
     reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 1; K. Harada and N. Sakai, Prob.
     Theor. Phys. 67, 67 (1982).
 10. For a review, see S. Weinberg, Rev. Mod. Phys. 61, 1-23 (1989).
                              References                            177

11. B. de Wit and D. Z. Freedman, Phys. Rev. D12, 2286 (1975). This
    articleis reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 1.
12. The firstexamples of gauge theories with N = 2 extended super-
    symmetry were given by P. Fayet, Nucl. Phys. B113, 135 (1976);
    reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 1.The approach presented here is
    similar to that of Fayet. A superfieldformalism was subsequently
    given by R. Grimm, M. Sohnius, and J. Scherk, Nucl. Phys. B113,
    77 (1977).Gauge theorieswith N = 2 and N = 4 supersymmetry in
    four spacetime dimensions were constructed by dimensional
    reduction
         of higher-dimensional theories with simple supersymmetry by
    L. Brink, J.H. Schwarz, and J. Scherk, Nucl. Phys. B113, 77 (1977);
    M. F. Sohnius, K. S. Stelle,and P. C. West, Nucl. Phys. B113, 127
    (1980).For other approaches, see M. F. Sohnius, Nucl. Phys. B138,
    109 (1979); A. Halperin, E. A. Ivanov, and V. I. Ogievetsky, Prima
    JETP 33, 176 (1981); P. Breitenlohner and M. F. Sohnius, Nucl.
    Phys. B178, 151 (1981); P. Howe, K. S. Stelle,and P. K. Townsend,
    Nucl. Phys. B214. 519 (1983).
13. E. Witten and D. Olive, Phys. Lett. 78B, 97 (1978). Also see H.
    Osborn, Phys. Lett.83B, 321 (1979).
14. E. B. Bogomol'nyi, Sov. J. Nucl. Phys. 24, 449 (1976).
15. D. Zwanziger, Phys. Rev. 176, 1480, 1489 (1968); J. Schwinger, Phys.
    Rev. 144, 1087 (1966); 173, 1536 (1968); B. Julia and A. Zee, Phys.
    Rev. Dll, 2227 (1974); F. A. Bais and J. R. Primack, Phys. Rev.
    D13, 819 (1975).(The lastarticlewas incorrectlyattributedto Julia
    and Zee in Chapter 23 of the firstprintings of Volume II.)
16. M. K. Prasad and C. M. Sommerfield, Phys. Rev. Lett. 35. 760
    (1975); E. B. Bogomol'nyi, Ref. 14; S. Coleman, S. Parke, A. Neveu,
    and C. M. Sommerfield, Phys. Rev. D15, 544 (1977).
17. This was noted by C. Montonen and D. Olive, Phys. Lett. 72B,
    117 (1977).The absence of one-loop correctionsto the masses was
    shown by A. D'Adda, R. Horsley, and P. Di Vecchia, Phys. Lett.
    76B, 298 (1978).
18. Obstacles to formulating theories with auxiliary fieldsfor N = 4
    supersymmetry have been analyzed by W Siegel and M. Rocek,
    Phys. Lett. 105B, 275 (1981).
19. The finitenessof the N = 4 theory was shown by M. F Sohnius and
    P.C. West, Nucl. Phys. B100, 245 (1981); P.S. Howe, K. S. Stelle,and
    P. Townsend, Nucl. Phys. B214, 519 (1983); S. Mandelstam, Nucl.
    Phys. B213,149 (1983); L. Brink, O. Lindgren, and B. E. W Nilsson,
    Nucl. Phys. B212,401 (1983);Phys. Lett.123B, 328 (1983).The proof
178              27 Supersymmetric Gauge Theories

    of finitenesswas extended to non-perturbative effectsby N. Seiberg,
    Phys. Lett. B206, 75 (1988). Also see S. Kovacs, hep-th/9902047,
    to be published. There is a wide class of ultraviolet-finiteN = 2
    theories; see P. S. Howe, K.  S. Stelle,and P. C. West, Phys. Lett.
    B124, 55 (1983).
20. H. Osborn, Ref. 13.
21. A. Sen, Phys. Lett. B329, 217 (1994); C. Vafa and E. Witten, Nucl.
    Phys. B 431, 3 (1994); L. Girardello,A. Giveon, M. Porrati,and A.
    Zaffaroni,Phys. Lett. B334, 331 (1994).
                                 28


              Supersymmetric               Versions

                 of the    Standard        Model




Physical phenomena at energies accessiblein today's accelerator
laboratories
       are accurately described by the standard model, the renormalizable
theory of quarks, leptons,and gauge bosons, governed by the gauge group
51/(3) x 51/(2) x 1/(1),described in Sections 18.7 and 21.3.The standard
model is today usually1 understood as a low-energy approximation to
some as-yet-unknown fundamental theory in which gravitation appears
unified with the strong and electroweak forces at an energy somewhere
in the range of 1016 to 1018 GeV. This raisesthe hierarchyproblem: what
accounts for the enormous ratioof thisfundamental energy scaleand the
energy scale « 300 GeV that characterizesthe standard model?
   The strongest theoreticalmotivation for supersymmetry is that itoffers
a hope of solving the hierarchy problem. Quarks, leptons, and gauge
bosons are required by the 51/(3) x 51/(2) x 1/(1) gauge symmetry to
appear with zero masses in the Lagrangian of the standard model, so that
the physical masses of these particlesare proportional to the electroweak
breaking scale,which in turn is proportional to the mass of the scalar
fieldsresponsible for the electroweak symmetry breakdown. The crux of
the hierarchy problemXa is that the scalar fields,unlike the fermion and
gauge boson fields,are not protected from acquiring large bare masses
by any symmetry of the standard model, so itisdifficulto see why their
masses, and hence allother masses, are not in the neighborhood of 1016
to 1018 GeV.
   It has been hoped that this problem could be solved by embedding the
standard model in a supersymmetric theory. If the scalar fieldsappear
in supermultipletsalong with fermions in a chiral representation of some
gauge group, then supersymmetry would require vanishing bare masses
for the scalarsas well as the fermions. All the masses of the standard
model would then be tied to the energy scale at which supersymmetry
is broken. The hope of a solution of the hierarchy problem along these
lineshas been the single strongest motivation for trying to incorporate
supersymmetry in a realistic theory.

                                  179
180               28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

  Unfortunately, none of the new particlesrequired by supersymmetric
theorieshave been detected, and no entirelysatisfactorysupersymmetric
version of the standard model has emerged so far. This chapter will
describe the attempts that have been made in thisdirection.




       28.1   Superfields, Anomalies,     and Conservation    Laws

In thissection we shall attempt to decide at least tentativelywhat
      should appear in a supersymmetric version of the standard model.
ingredients
  None of the quark and lepton fieldsof the standard model belong to the
adjoint representation of the 51/(3) x 51/(2) x 1/(1)gauge group, so they
cannot be the superpartners of known gauge bosons and must therefore
be included in chiralscalar superfields.We willdefine I/,-, D,-,£/,-,
                                                                   2),-,
                                                                       N,-,
E(9 and £,-as the left-chiral
                            superfieldswhose \pL components are the left-
handed fieldsof the quarks of charge 2e/3 and — e/3, of the antiquarks
of charge —2e/3 and +e/39 of the leptons of charge 0 and —e, and of the
antileptons of charge +e9 respectively,with i a generation label running
over values 1, 2, and 3. (For instance,the spinor components of U\9 I/2,
and I/3 are the left-handed fieldsof the u, c, and t quarks, respectively.)
Of these superfields,I/,-
                        and D,-form 517(2) doublets, Nt and Et also form
51/(2) doublets, and the others are 51/(2) singlets.The quark superfields
form 51/(3) tripletsand the antiquark superfieldsform 51/(3) antitriplets,
with color indices suppressed, and the leptons and antilepton superfields
are 51/(3) singlets.As mentioned earlier,the particlesdescribed by the
scalarcomponents of these superfieldsare known as squarks, antisquarks,
sleptons, and antisleptons. There are also the gauginos, the spin 1/2
superpartners of the gauge bosons of 51/(3),51/(2),and 1/(1),respectively
known as the gluino, wino, and bino.*
  We must also add some mechanism that produces a spontaneous
      of 51/(2) x 1/(1)and gives mass to allthe quarks and leptons as well
breakdown
as to the W± and Z°. The simplest possibilityis to suppose the existence


*As discussedinSection28.3,theenergyscalethatcharacterizessupersymmetry
     is expectedto be considerably
 breaking                         higherthan the « 300 GeV thatcharacterizes
 the breakingof 517(2)x 17(1),so thereisa substantialrange of energies
                                                                     in which
 supersymmetrybutnot 517(2)x 17(1)may be considered  tobe broken.In thisrange,
 thegauginoshavemassesthataregovernedby 517(2)x 17(1)symmetry,so theneutral
 electroweakgauginosofdefinite mass aresuperpartnersof the517(2)triplet
                                                                      W° and
                B, known astheneutral
 the517(2)singlet                     wino and thebino,ratherthansuperpartners
 of theZ° and the photon.When 517(2)x 17(1)breakingistakenintoaccountthere
 isa smallmixingoftheneutralwino and bino.
           28.1 Superfields,Anomalies, and Conservation Laws         181

of just two more 517(2) doublets of left-chiral
                                              superfields:

                                                             <28u)
                   *-(#)■             *-($)■
which appear in the Lagrangian density in linear combinations of the
SU(3) x SU(2) x [/(l)-invariantJ^-terms:
               -               ,              -               ,   (28.1.2)
      [(D,H?       UtHr)Dj]^        [(£///?       NtHT)Ej]j
and

                          [(D,H2+-I7,fl?)t/;]^,                   (28.1.3)
with obvious contractions of color indices.According to Eq. (26.4.11),a
non-vanishing expectation value of the scalarcomponent of H® gives mass
to the charged leptons and charge — e/3 quarks, while a non-vanishing
expectation value of the scalar component of H% gives mass to the charge
+2e/3 quarks. These expectation values of course also give mass to the
W- and Z° vector bosons and, since the H\ and if2 are 51/(2) doublets,
we automatically get the same successfulresultsfor these masses as found
in Section 21.3. Note that supersymmetry does not allow the complex
conjugates of the H\ and Hi left-chiralsuperfields to appear in the
superpotential,so a vacuum expectation value of the scalar component
of H® cannot give masses to the charge +2e/3 quarks, and a vacuum
expectation value of the scalar component of H® cannot give mass to the
charge — e/3 quarks or the charged leptons,which is why both H\ and Hi
are needed to give masses to allthe quarks and leptons.
  Of course, there might be more than one of the H\ and/or Hi
      Their numbers are partly constrained by the condition of anomaly
doublets.
cancellation.We saw in Section 22.4 that the gauge symmetries of the
non-supersymmetric standard model are anomaly-free, as they must be
for quantum mechanical consistency,but now there are additional spinor
fieldsin the Lagrangian. The gaugino fieldsdon't create any problems,
because theirleft-handed components belong to the adjoint representation
of the gauge group, which is real for allgauge groups. The only problem
can arisefrom the higgsinos — the spin 1/2 components of the superfields
{H\, iff) and (H£, H®). The spinor components of each (H®, H^)
     of superfieldsproduces an SU(2)-SU(2)-U(l) anomaly proportional
doublet
to £ t\y = (\g)2{ig')+(- ig)2(\gf)= igV> while the spinor components
of each (Hf, H%) doublet of superfieldsproduces an 5C/(2)-5C/(2)-C/(l)
anomaly proportional to £ t\y = (\g)\- \gf)+ (- l2g)2(-\gf)= - \g2gf.
The cancellationof anomalies thus requires an equal number of (H®, H^~)
and (H£, H$) doublets. In this case, all anomalies cancel, including the
C/(l)3and (/(l)-graviton-gravitonanomalies. The next section will give
an argument that there isin factjust one of each type of doublet.
182                  28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

   In a theory constructed along these lines,we have to give up one of the
attractivefeaturesof the non-supersymmetric standard model, that is,that
it automaticallyexcludes any renormalizable interactionsthat violate the
conservation of baryon or lepton number. There are severalrenormalizable
supersymmetric 5 [7(3)x 517(2) x l/(l)-invariant^-terms that could be
included in the Lagrangian density that would violate baryon and/or
lepton number conservation without violatingthe 51/(3) x 51/(2) x 1/(1)
gauge symmetries:
                 -               ,            -               ,
        [(D,Nj       UtEj)Dk],       [(EtNj       NtEj)Ek]^       (28.1.4)

and also

                                 [ft¥^                            (28.1.5)

with the three suppressed color indices in Eq. (28.1.5)understood to be
contracted with an antisymmetric 6-symbol to give a color singlet.With
allof these interactionspresent, there would be no clever way to assign
baryon and lepton numbers to the squarks and sleptons that would avoid
an unsuppressed violationof baryon and lepton number conservation.For
instance, the exchange of the scalar boson of the D superfield between
verticesfor interactions(28.1.4)and (28.1.5)would lead to the process
ULdRUR —► e^, observed for instance as p —► n° + e+, at a catastrophic rate
that is only suppressed by factors of coupling constants. To avoid this,
it is necessary to make an independent assumption that would rule out
some or allof the interactions(28.1.4)—(28.1.5).
   Note that itis not necessary to rule out allof the interactions(28.1.4)
and (28.1.5). For instance, suppose that we assume only that baryon
number is conserved, with conventional baryon number assignments: the
Ut and Dt left-chiral  superfieldsare assigned baryon number +1/3; the
Ui  and  Dt  are assigned baryon number —1/3; and the L,-,£,-,Hi, and
Hi  allare  assigned baryon number 0. This would allow the interactions
(28.1.4)while forbidding the interactions(28.1.5).Despite appearances,
the interactions(28.1.4)alone do not violate the conservation of lepton
number, provided the scalar components of the superfieldsare assigned
appropriate lepton numbers. This can be done by assigninglepton number
0 to the Nt and Et superfields,lepton number — 1 to the I/,-,          and
                                                               D,-,£/,-,
Dt superfields,lepton number —2 to the Et superfields,lepton number 0
to the Hi and Hi superfields,and lepton numbers —1 and +1 to 0l and
Or, respectively.(Recall that such symmetries, under which 9 transforms
non-trivially,are known as R-symmetries.) Then all quarks and leptons
have conventional lepton numbers: the fermion components v,x and en,
which are the coefficientsof Ql in Nt and £,-,have the lepton numbers
0 + 1 = +1; the fermion components eiR of the Et superfieldshave lepton
           28.1 Superfields,Anomalies, and Conservation Laws           183

numbers —2+1 = —1, and the quarks and antiquarks have lepton numbers
—1 + 1=0. The higgsinos (the fermion components of H\ and if2) have
lepton numbers 0+ 1 = +1. On the other hand, the scalar components of
the superfieldshave the same lepton numbers as the superfieldsthemselves,
which are unconventional. Further, the <^-term of a left-chiral superfieldis
the coefficientof Q\, so the interactionsin Eq. (28.1.4)have lepton numbers
-1 +0-1+2       = 0 and 0 + 0-2 + 2 = 0; the H\ interactions(28.1.2)have
lepton number -1+0-1+2            = 0 and 0 + 0-2 + 2 = 0, respectively;
and the if2 interaction(28.1.3)has lepton number —1+0—1+2               = 0;
so none of these interactionsviolatethe conservation of lepton number.
Also, the scalar components of H\ and Hi have lepton number 0, so
theirvacuum expectation values also do not violatethe conservation of
lepton number. With this assignment of lepton numbers, lepton number
conservation rulesout any renormalizable interactionsthat would violate
baryon number conservation: the interaction(28.1.5)has lepton number
—1 — 1 — 1 + 2 = —1, and so isforbidden.
  The interactions (28.1.4)would allow an alternativemechanism for
breaking 517(2) x 17(1)and giving mass to the charged leptons and charge
—e/3 quarks: the scalar components of the neutrino superfieldsN,-might
have non-vanishing vacuum expectation values. (With the lepton number
assignments of the previous paragraph this expectation value would not
violatelepton number conservation,because these scalarcomponents have
the lepton number of the Nt superfields,which is zero.) But we cannot
rely on thismechanism to letus do without the H\ superfieldsaltogether,
because we still need the Hi interactions(28.1.3)to give mass to the charge
+2e/3 quarks and, as we have seen, the cancellationof anomalies requires
equal numbers of H\ and Hi superfields.
  Itis usually assumed instead that some symmetries forbid both
interactions
      (28.1.4)and (28.1.5).Obviously, these symmetries could be baryon
and lepton number conservation, with conventional assignments of these
numbers: t/,-,  D,- having baryon number B = 1/3 and lepton number
L =  0, Ui and D,-having baryon number B = —1/3 and lepton number
0, Nt and Et having lepton number L = +1 and baryon number 0, £,-
having lepton number —1 and baryon number 0, and //?,iff and H^ if2
and 9l and 9r allhaving baryon and lepton numbers 0. The same results
apply ifwe only assume the conservation of certainlinearcombinations of
baryon and lepton number, such as the anomaly-free combination B — L
discussed in Section 22.4.
  There are widespread doubts about whether itis possible to have exact
continuous global symmetries, because in string theory the existence of
any exact continuous symmetry would imply the existence of a massless
spin 1 particlecoupled to the symmetry current, so that the symmetry
would have to be local, not global.1^ But the interactions(28.1.4)and
184               28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

(28.1.5)may also be banned by assuming a discrete global symmetry,
known as the conservation of R parity? The R parity isdefined to be +1
for quarks, leptons, gauge bosons, and Higgs scalars,and —1 for their
superpartners. This R parity is equal to

                         n* = (-l)F(-l)3<B-L>,                     (28.1.6)

where (—1)F is the fermion parity,which is +1 for all bosons and —1
for all fermions. Fermion parity is the same sign as is produced by a
In rotation,and is therefore always conserved, so if B — L is conserved
then so is R parity.** It is possible that R parity may be conserved
even ifB — L is not, but in fact the interactions(28.1.4)and (28.1.5)are
forbidden by R parityconservation,so as far as renormalizable interactions
are concerned R parity conservation implies the conservation of both
baryon and lepton number. This is not true of the non-renormalizable
supersymmetric interactionsthat are presumably produced by physical
processes at very high energies. The baryon- and lepton-non-conserving
processes produced by such interactionsare discussed in Section 28.7.
   All of the new 'sparticles'
                             (squarks, sleptons,gauginos, and higgsinos)
that are required by supersymmetry theories have negative R parity,so
if R parity is exact and unbroken then the lightestof the new particles
required by supersymmetry must be absolutely stable.All of the other new
particleswillthen undergo a chain of decays, ultimatelyyieldingordinary
particlesand the lightestnew particle.Much of the phenomenology of
various supersymmetry models is governed by the choice of which of the
new particlesis the lightest.
  With supersymmetry and eitherR parity or B — L conserved, the most
general renormalizable Lagrangian for the superfields discussed above
consistsof the usual gauge-invariant kinematic part for the chiral super-
      given by a sum of terms of the form (O* exp(—V)Q>)o for each of the
fields,
quark, lepton,and Higgs chiralsuperfields,plus the usual gauge-invariant
kinematic term for the gauge superfields,given by a sum of terms of the
form eap(WaWp)r    for each of the SU(3\ SU(2\ and U(l) fieldstrength
superfields,plus the supersymmetric Yukawa couplings, given by a
    combination of the interactions(28.1.2),(28.1.3),and a new <^-term
linear



**The valueof         is—1 forquark and leptonsuperfields
                                                        and +1 forallother
              (—1)3<B_L)
            so the conservation
  superfields,                of R parityis equivalento invarianceunder a
               inwhichallquark and leptonsuperfields
  transformation                                  changesignwithno change
  inothersuperfields.
                   Thisinvariance                     inReference3 inorder
                                         was introduced
                                 principle
  toruleouttheinteractions      and (28.1.5).
                         (28.1.4)
            28.1 Superfields,Anomalies, and Conservation Laws                    185

coupling H\ and Hi:

  *y   =                  -                                      -
           E *8 [(*>««?       uvi)H?+E              *S [(£<"?        ^)«i
            y                                   y
           + £ *V        "                      +            ~              + H.c.
                  [(AH2+   Wtf)          fy]^       0[H}HT       H02H°]^
              y
                                                                             (28.1.7)
As we will see in Section 28.3, more terms will have to be added to the
Lagrangian in order to account for supersymmetry breaking.
  The coefficient\i in Eq. (28.1.7)has the dimensions of mass, and is
the only dimensional parameter that enters in the supersymmetric version
of the standard model Lagrangian. It is somewhat disappointing to find
that this term is stillallowed, because it revives the hierarchy problem:
why is n not of order 1016 to 1018 GeV? The //-term in Eq. (28.1.7)
can be avoided if we assume that lepton number is conserved, with the
unconventional lepton number assignments discussed above that would
allow the interactions(28.1.4)but not the interactions(28.1.5).In this
case, the //-term carries lepton number +2 and is therefore also
forbidden.
     This term can also be forbidden ifwe assume a 1/(1)Teccei-Quinn
symmetry,'4 for which the superfieldsH\ and Hi carry equal quantum
numbers, say +1, while 0l and 9r are neutral. The interactions(28.1.2)
and (28.1.3)which give mass to the quarks and leptons are then allowed if,
for instance,we give Peccei-Quinn quantum numbers — 1 to the left-chiral
superfieldsof antisquarks and antisleptonswhile the left-chiralsuperfields
of squarks and sleptons are taken to be neutral. This choice then also
forbids the dangerous interactions(28.1.4)and (28.1.5).Unfortunately, as
we willsee in Section 28.4,the //-term in Eq. (28.1.7)seems to be needed
for phenomenological reasons. The theories of gravity-mediated super-
symmetry breaking discussed in Section 31.7 provide a natural mechanism
for producing a //-termof an acceptable magnitude.
  We can obtain a crude upper bound on the masses of the new
particles
     by assuming that supersymmetry does solve the hierarchy problem
discussed at the beginning of this chapter. In accord with the theorem
of Section 27.6, if supersymmetry were unbroken the contribution to the
mass of the scalar component of H\ or Hi from one-loop diagrams with
an intermediate quark, lepton, W or Z loop would be cancelled by the
corresponding one-loop diagram with an intermediate squark, slepton,
wino, or bino. Therefore with supersymmetry broken the contribution
Smjj of such diagrams to the squared masses of the H\ and Hi scalarsis
a sum of terms of order (^/Sn2)Am^       where &s is the Yukawa or gauge
coupling  of the Higgs   scalar to supermultiplet 5, and km] is the mass-
squared splittingwithin the supermultiplet.To avoid having to fine-tune
186               28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

these corrections,we need dm2H not much larger than the coefficientof
order (300 GeV)2 of the term in the standard model Lagrangian density
that gives the observed 51/(2) x 1/(1)breaking in the tree approximation,
so we willassume that dm2H < (1 TeV)2. For instance,the top quark and
squark have couplings to Hi of order unity,so we expect that the splittings
Am2 should be lessthan about Sn2 TeV2, and hence the masses of the top
squarks should be lessthan about 10 TeV. We willsee in Section 28.4 that
the ratesof flavor-changing processes can be brought within experimental
upper bounds by taking the masses of the squarks to be nearly equal, in
which case thiscan be taken as a rough upper limiton the masses of all
the squarks. (However itis possible that the rates of these processes may
be suppressed instead by very large masses of the firsttwo generations of
squarks, while the mass of the top squark isbelow the 10 TeV naturalness
bound.4a) The limitsset by thissort of argument on the masses of other
                    — 1 are somewhat weaker, but at leastin the
particleswith R =                                                 popular
class of models discussed in Section 28.6, none of the masses of these
particlesare expected to be much greater than the squark masses, so 10
TeV can be taken as an upper bound on allof them. On the other hand,
the fact that none of these particleshave been observed only indicates
that theirmasses are probably greater than about 100 GeV, so there isan
ample mass range in which they may yet be found.
                                 * * *
  If R parity conservation or some other conservation law makes the
lightestof the new particlespredicted by supersymmetry stable,then some
of these particlesmay be leftfrom the early universe.The number density
of these relicscan be estimated using techniques that were originally
applied to the cosmic density of massive neutrinos.46To give one example
of thissortof calculation,we shallshow that for a broad range of plausible
masses, the new stable particle of supersymmetry theories cannot be a
charged and uncolored particle,likea charged slepton,wino, or higgsino.4c
  Once the cosmic temperature T (in energy units,with the Boltzmann
constant set equal to unity)drops below the mass m of any stablecharged
untrapped particle,theirnumber nR3 in a volume R3 that expands with
the universe is decreased by annihilation at a rate per particleequal to
van, where vo is the mean value of the product of the relativevelocity
and the annihilationcross-section.That is,

                          d(nR3); =
                           v             2n3
                              ,     -van2R3,
                             dt
so that
           28.1 Superfields,Anomalies, and Conservation Laws          187

where 0 labels the epoch at which T ~ m. The annihilation process
is exothermic, so va approaches a constant for v < 1. Also, in a
radiation-dominated phase of the cosmic expansion R oc r1//2,so the
integralconverges, and gives

                                      +
               \nR}Jt^       \nRiJ0       V<TJt0 ^{t/t^'2



The density nB of baryon number (baryons minus antibaryons) goes as
/?~3, so this can be rewritten as a formula for the present ratio of new
particlesto baryons:
                                                  ~
                   (n/nB)oo= [(nB/n)o+ 2 vo nBo to] .           (28.1.10)
We expect that the ratio (n/nB)o at the time that T drops to a value « m
is roughly of order unity,and sincein any realistictheory the present ratio
(n/nB)oomust be much lessthan unity,we can neglect the firstterm in the
denominator on the right-hand side of Eq. (28.1.10),and write instead
                                          1
                           (n/nB)oo * _         •                 (28.1.11)
                                      VG Hbo *0
The precise value of vg depends on the particlespin and itsinteractions;
keeping track only of factorsof 2n, the particlemass m, and the electric
charge, we can estimate it generally to be of order
                              e4J\f    , J\f
                         vg « -—= « 10"3^ ,                      (28.1.12)
where Jf isthe number of charged particlespin stateswith mass lessthan
m, into which this particlemay annihilate.Also, the age of the universe
at a temperature To ^ m is to « m4/mpL, where mpi ^ 1018 GeV, and the
density of baryon number isabout 10~9 times the photon number density,
which isof order T3, so that nBo « 10~9m3. Putting this together,we find
the present ratio of the new charged particlesto baryons:

           (n/nB)oo « 10" -^-      » Vf
                                            ^^
                                                     .           (28.1.13)

These new charged particleswould experience the same condensations into
galaxies,stars,and planets as ordinary baryons, so thiswould be the ratio
observed today on earth.But experiments4* that apply mass spectroscopy
to samples of water that have been strongly enriched in heavy water-like
molecules by electrolysishave set limitsof about \Q~2XnB on the number
density of new charged particleswith 6 GeV < m < 330 GeV in terrestrial
matter. Thus, even ifJf isas large as 1000, these measurements decisively
rule out the existence of any new charged untrapped particlesin this
188                    28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

mass range in the numbers that would have been leftover from the early
universe.
  On the other hand, neutral untrapped particleswould be leftin inter-
galacticspace. Such particlesmight well provide the 'missing mass,' that
seems to be necessary to account for the gravitationalfieldthat governs
the motion of galaxiesin clustersof galaxies.One of these possible neutral
particlesis the gravitino,whose cosmological abundance is discussed in
Section 28.3. Elliset al.4chave extended cosmological considerations to
allthe new particlesrequired by supersymmetry.



      28.2     Supersymmetry       and Strong-Electroweak       Unification

We shall have to defer a detailed assessment of supersymmetric models
of particlephysics untilwe are ready to consider how supersymmetry is
broken. In this section we will consider the quantitative application of
supersymmetry in one context in which the mechanism for the breakdown
of supersymmetry is relativelyunimportant, and in which supersymmetry
has scored what so far isitsgreatestempirical success.
  If the 51/(3) x 51/(2) x 1/(1)gauge group of the strong and electroweak
interactionsisembedded in a simple group G that has the known quarks
and leptons (plusperhaps some 51/(3) x 51/(2) x l/(l)-neutralfermions) as
a representation,then, as described in Section 21.5,at energies at or above
the scaleMx at which G isspontaneously broken, the 51/(3) x 51/(2) x 1/(1)
coupling constants willbe related by
                         i    i   5e'2
                        g; = g2 = -^- at energies > Mx      .             (28.2.1)

At energies far below Mx, these couplings are seriouslyaffectedby renor-
malization corrections. If measured at a scale \i < Mx, the couplings
willhave values g](//),g2(/x),     governed by one-loop renormalization
                             g/2(/j),
group equations

             = px              v±g(ii) = p2 (g(fi)),               = ft
^'M                 (g'M),                                     (gs(ri),
                                                       fi^gs(fi)
                                                                (28.2.2)
with initialconditions at Mx satisfyingEq. (28.2.1).In the original use5
of these renormalization group equations, discussed in Section 21.5, the
beta functions were calculatedin one-loop order to be

                             * =                                          (2813)
                                   W'
                                    ,3
                                             +                            <28i4>
                             *--(-T4J?           ?)'
        28.2 Supersymmetry and Strong-Electroweak Unification         189




where ng is the number of generations of quarks and leptons and the
relativelysmall contributionsof scalarfieldsare here neglected.Since Mx
will turn out to be many orders of magnitude larger than the energies
accessiblewith today's accelerators,it seems reasonable to suppose that
supersymmetry is unbroken over most of the range below Mx, in which
case all of the new fieldsdiscussed in the previous section need to be
included in calculations of the beta functions in Eq. (28.2.1). These
new fieldsintroduce three major changes in the calculationsof the beta
functions:
1. For every gauge boson, there is a Majorana gaugino with the same
51/(3) x 51/(2) x 1/(1)quantum numbers. Eq. (17.5.41)shows that the
ratio of the contribution to the beta function for any gauge coupling of
a Dirac fermion that furnishes a contribution of the gauge group with
generators tA to the contribution of the corresponding gauge boson is
—4C2/HC1,    where according to Eqs. (17.5.33)and (17.5.34)the ratio of
C\ and C2 is given by:
                                 = -(Ci/C2)Tr(tctD).
                  £ CcabCdba                                      (28.2.6)
                  AB
For the adjoint representation,(tc)AB = iCABC> so C\ = C2, and so a
Dirac fermion in the adjoint representation makes a contribution that is
—4/11 that of the gauge bosons. But the gauginos are Majorana fermions,
so theircontribution is —2/11 that of the gauge boson. Thus the term
11/6 and 11/4 in Eqs. (28.2.4)and (28.2.5)are reduced by a factor 9/11
to 9/6 and 9/4, respectively.
2. For every left-handed quark, lepton,antiquark, or antileptonfield,there
is a complex scalar fieldwith the same 51/(3) x 51/(2) x 1/(1)quantum
numbers. Following the same method as in Section 17.5, it is not hard
to calculatethat the contribution of a complex scalarfieldbelonging to a
representation of a gauge group with generators tA to the beta function
for the gauge coupling g,-is

                                     =
                          [ft(ft)]«lar         ,                  (28.2.7)
                                         f^J
where Tr (^b) = g}C2i^AB- This is 1/4 the contribution of a Dirac spinor
fieldin the same representation,given by Eq. (18.7.2),and hence 1/2
the contribution of each left-handed spinor field(including the complex
conjugates of the right-handed components of the Dirac fields).Thus the
           of ng
coefficients     in                      should
                    Eqs. (28.2.3)-(28.2.5)      be increased by a factor
3/2.
190                28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

3. The decrease by a factor 9/11 of the negative gauge boson terms in the
beta function and the increase by a factor 3/2 of the positivesquark and
slepton terms both lead to a general decrease in the rate at which the three
gauge coupling constants diverge below Mx from the ratios(28.2.1).This
willincreaseour estimate of Mx, but, as we shallsee,in itselfitwould have
no affecton the prediction of the electroweak mixing parameter sin26. But
these changes do enhance the relativecontribution of the Higgs scalars,
which was neglected in Eqs. (28.2.3)-(28.2.5),    and which is now also
accompanied   with the larger contribution of the accompanying higgsinos.
With ns of the superfields(//{*,iff) or (Hf, H$) discussed in the previous
section,the constant C2i in Eq. (28.2.7)is [(1/2)2+ (-1/2)2]h5 = ns/2 for
51/(2),and is 2n5(+l/2)2 = ns/2 for 1/(1).According to Eq. (28.2.7),the
scalar components of these superfieldsmake a contribution to j?iequal
to nsg'3/96n2 and a contribution to j?2 also equal to nsg3/96n2. As we
have seen, the Majorana higgsinos contribute twice as much to the beta
functions as complex scalars with the same quantum numbers, so the
superfields(H®, H^) or (Hf, H®) make a total contribution to j?i and
j?2that is 3/2 the contribution of the Higgs scalars,and hence equal to
nsg'3/32n2 and nsg3/32n2, respectively.
  Making   allthese changes in the beta functions,we now have

                      Pl              +        '                   (28.2.8)
                            4*2 V 6       8)

                                                                   (28.2.9)

                      fu-   £   (-9 + nA                          (28.2.10)

The solutionsof the renormalization group equations (28.2.2)are then




It is convenient to take \i = mz, so that SU(2) x U(l) can be regarded
as unbroken over almost all of the range of energies in which we use
the formulas (28.2.11)-(28.2.13).Using Eq. (28.2.1),the differencebetween
Eqs. (28.2.12) and (28.2.13)gives
        28.2 Supersymmetry and Strong-Electroweak Unification                  191


Table 28.1. Values of the electroweakmixing parameter sin20 and unification
mass M\ given by Eqs. (28.2.17)and (28.2.18),
                                            as functionsof the number ns of
left-chiral
         superfieldd oublets         or
                            {H*, tff) (H+, ff°).


                         ns       sin29      Mx      (GeV)
                         0        0.203       8.7 x 1017
                         2        0.231       2.2 x 1016
                         4        0.253       1.1 x 1015




while the differencebetween Eq. (28.2.12)and 3/5 of Eq. (28.2.11)gives
          1          3             1
                                                                         <—>
       g2(mz)     5g'2(mz)        2n2 (-§♦      a)     ■»(£)•
Eq. (21.3.19)allows us to express the electroweak couplings in terms of
the electroweak mixing angle 0 and the positron charge e:

  g(mz) = -e(mz)/sin0         ,           g\mz) = -e(mz)/cos0          . (28.2.16)
We can then solve for the unknowns           ln(Mx/mz)       and sin20 in terms of
input parameters e(mz) and gs(mz):
                  18 + 3n, + (^(mz)/g>z))(60-2ns)
        sin2, _                                                           v      ;
                                    108 + 6ns


                                                                          v
         Vmz;       v^mz);         v          i8 + n5            ;
For n5 = 0 Eq. (28.2.17)gives the same result(21.5.15)for sin20 as was
originallycalculated (ignoring the small contribution of Higgs scalars)
in non-supersymmetric theories,but the value (28.2.18)of ln(Mx/mz) is
larger than the originalresult(21.5.16)by a factor 11/9, which as we have
seen arisesfrom gaugino contributions to the beta functions.
  Using the same input parameters e2(mz)/4n = (128)-1, g*(mz)/4n =
0.118,mz = 91.19 GeV as in Section 21.5 now gives the numerical results
shown in Table 28.1.As discussed in the previous section,the necessityof
cancelling anomalies in the electroweak currents requires equal numbers
of (Hi, iff) and (Hf, H%) doublets, so we consider only even values of
the number ns of these superfields.
  Remarkably, the value ns = 2 for the simplest plausibletheory yields a
value6 sin26 = 0.231 which isin perfectagreement with the experimentally
192               28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

observed value, sin20 = 0.23. The value of Mx is 20 times greater7
than calculated in this way in non-supersymmetric theories,leading to a
decrease by a factor 20~4 in the rate for proton decay processes likep —►
7i°+e+, thus removing a conflictwith the experimental non-observation of
such processes.(Proton decay isdiscussed in more detailin Section 28.7.)
This increasein the value of Mx brings itcloserto the energy scale « 1018
GeV at which gravitation has the same strength as other interactions.It
may be that this remaining gap may be filledby a change in gravitational
interactionsat very high energies.7*
  A value ns = 4 would give a value for sin26 in serious disagreement
with experiment, and a value of Mx low enough to revive the conflict
with expectations for proton decay. This makes a strong case for having
just one of each superfield(//{\iff) and (Hf, H$).
  Unlike the calculated values of sin20 and Mx, the calculated value of
the common    gauge coupling (28.2.1)at Mx does depend on the number
of generations as well as the number of scalardoublets.With ng = 3 and
ns = 2 and our previous input parameters, Eq. (28.2.13)gives

                      g2(Mx)       g2(Mx)         1
                                                                (28.2.19)
                        An           An       17.5


              28.3   Where     is Supersymmetry       Broken?

Supersymmetry if valid at all is certainly not apparent in the menu of
known particles,so any consideration of the implications of
       at ordinary energies requires us to make some assumption about
supersymmetry
the mechanism of supersymmetry breaking. It would be simplest to
     that supersymmetry isbroken like517(2) x 1/(1),by effectsoccurring
suppose
in the tree approximation of the supersymmetric standard model. This
possibilitymay be definitelyruled out.
  One argument against a tree-approximation breakdown of
       is based on the mass sum rule (27.5.11),which holds separately
supersymmetry
for each value of the unbroken conserved quantities color and electric
charge. In the color-tripletsector with electriccharge — e/3 the only
known fermions are the d, 5, and b quarks, for which

                      m2d+ m2s+m2b~     (5 GeV)2 .               (28.3.1)

According to the sum rule,ifthere are no other fermions with thiscolor
and charge, then the sum of all squared masses for bosons (counting
each spin state separately) with the same color and charge must equal
about 2(5 GeV)2. In particular,each of the squarks with this color
and charge must have a mass no greater than 7 GeV The existence of
                 283       Where is Supersymmetry Broken?                  193

such lightsquarks is definitelyruled out experimentally; they would have
shown up, for instance,as a contribution to the rate for electron-positron
annihilationinto hadrons at energies where this process has been studied
very thoroughly.
  This argument could be invalidated if there were a heavy fourth
        of quarks. There is another argument, due to Dimopoulos and
generation
Georgi,3 which would apply however many heavy quarks there are and
which yields an even stronger upper bound on the mass of the lightest
squark. The unbroken conservation of charge and color tellsus that the
only non-zero D^o-terms in the supersymmetric standard model are for
the generators y of 1/(1)and t^ of S 1/(2),which we shallcallD\ and Z>2,
respectively.The values of these generators are y = — g'/6 and ti = +g/2
for the left-handed quarks of charge 2e/3; y = — g'/6 and t^ = —g/2
for the left-handed quarks of charge — e/3; y = 2g'/3 and t^ = 0 for the
right-handed quarks of charge 2e/3; and y = — g'/3 and ti = 0 for the
                                —
right-handed quarks of charge e/3. Also, the squark fieldsare color-
        and thereforecannot have vacuum expectation values.According
triplets,
to Eq. (27.5.4),the mass-squared matrix of the charge 2e/3 color-triplet
                squarks is
(not antitriplet)
            jruJFu-g'Di/6              + gD2/2                      u
  Mlu                                                                   (28.3.2)
                           3?u                     JiuJi\j+2gfDx/?>
while the mass-squared matrix of the charge —e/3 color-triplet
                                                             squarks is
                     -        -
             JTDJlD    g'Dt /6 gD2/2           &*D        ]
   M20D =                                                   . (28.3.3)
                            &D            J?DjrD-g'Di/3       J
Also, Eq. (27.5.6)gives the mass-squared matrices of the quarks of charge
2e/3 and —e/3 here as just Jt*vJi\j and Jt*DJii>,respectively,with no
mixing with the gauginos.
  Now let vu and v& be the normalized eigenvectors of the quark mass-
squared matrices Jt*vJl\j and Ji*DJt[) corresponding to the quarks u and
d of lowest mass, and consider the expectation values of the corresponding
squark mass-squared matrices
                       0                  0      = <         2g'Di
                                 M?01/                   +              (28.3.4)
                       <                                       3
                       0                  o      = m2-       g'Dx
                                 Mlo                                    (28.3.5)

These expectation values are weighted averages of the squared masses of
the squarks of charge 2e/3 and —e/3, respectively,so at leastone squark
of charge 2e/3 must have a squared mass less than ml + 2g'D\/3, and
194               28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

at leastone squark of charge — e/3 must have a squared mass lessthan
    —
m2d gfD\/3. Thus, depending on the sign of D\9 there must be eithera
squark of charge 2e/3 lighterthan the u quark, or a squark of charge —e/3
lighterthan the d quark.
  Needless to say, the existenceof a charged color-triplet scalarthis light
would radicallychange strong-interactionphenomenology. Like the u and
d quarks, this colored scalar would appear as an ingredient of hadrons
with a 'constituent'mass of a few hundred MeV, which is certainly not
seen. Since this scalar is electrically
                                      charged, itwould also be created in
pairs in  e+-e~ annihilationat energies above a few hundred MeV, making
a contribution to the annihilation cross-sectionthat would destroy the
excellentagreement between theory and experiment for thiscross-section.
Even worse, since the u and d quarks are so light,and D\ isexpected to be
of the order of the supersymmetry-breaking scale,Eqs. (28.3.4)and (28.3.5)
indicate that one of the squarks would have a negative squared mass,
meaning that this squark fieldwould have to develop a non-vanishing
expectation value, breaking both color and charge conservation. We are
forced to rejectthe simple pictureof supersymmetry broken spontaneously
in the tree approximation in a supersymmetric version of the standard
model.
  One way out of this conclusion would be to add another 17(1)gauge
superfieldto the theory. If allthe quark superfieldscarry the same value g
of thisnew 17(1)generator, then the corresponding D-term D would make
an additive contribution gb to the right-hand sides of both Eqs. (28.3.4)
and (28.3.5). If this term were sufficientlylarge, then it could give a
large positivevalue to allof the squark squared masses, avoiding allthe
problems mentioned above. But there is no sign of such a new neutral
gauge boson at accessibleenergies,and in any case we would stillhave an
upper bound of 7 GeV on the masses of allthe squarks of charge —e/3.
   It is not necessarilya bad thing that we have to look for the
     of supersymmetry elsewhere than in the tree approximation of the
breaking
supersymmetric standard model. If supersymmetry were broken in this
approximation, then the characteristicmass that sets the scale of super-
symmetry breaking would be some mass parameter in the Lagrangian,
which would in turn set the scale of all other masses in the standard
model. We would then stillbe confronted with the hierarchy problem:
why isthismass scaleso much lessthan 1016-1018 GeV?
   There isone known way to explain such large mass ratios.If
       isnot spontaneously broken in the tree approximation in whatever
supersymmetry
fieldtheory unifiesallthe interactionsat some high mass scale Mx, then as
shown in Section 27.6,itwillnot be broken in any order of perturbation
theory. But it can be broken by non-perturbative effects.In particular,
if there is some gauge fieldwith an asymptotically free gauge coupling
                 28.3 Where is Supersymmetry Broken?                 195

y(li)at renormalization scale//,and if^2(/z)/87i2is substantiallylessthan
unity for \i« My, then as discussed in Section 18.3,thisgauge interaction
willbecome strong at an energy of order Ms = Mx exp(—Sn2b/^2(Mx)\
where b is a number of order unity. It is not necessary for ^2(Mx)/Sn2
to be very small in order to have Ms many orders of magnitude lessthan
Mx. We willsee in Section 29.4 that supersymmetry can indeed be broken
in just this way, by a gauge coupling that has become strong at some
energy Ms < Mx- Indeed, thisisjust what happens to chiralsymmetry in
quantum chromodynamics; there is no mystery why the proton mass (or
at leastitsmain part,due to the dynamical breakdown of chiralsymmetry,
and not to the tiny masses of the u and d quarks) is so much smaller
than the unificationscale Mx- Alternatively,the forces that are strong
at energy Ms may produce a potential for scalar fields,whose vacuum
expectation value then breaks supersymmetry.
  There are no signs of any new strong interactionof the known quarks
and leptons, so we have to assume that the observed particlesof the
standard model are neutral with respect to the strong force that breaks
supersymmetry. Supersymmetry breaking therefore occurs in a 'hidden
sector'of particlesthat do feelthisnew strong force.The remaining
      then, iswhat isthe mechanism by which supersymmetry breaking in
question,
thishidden sectoriscommunicated to the known particlesof the standard
model? As we shallsee,most of our expectations for the phenomenologi-
cal implicationsof supersymmetry depend on the answer to thisquestion,
rather than on the detailsof the breakdown of supersymmetry itself.
  Of course, the mechanism for communicating supersymmetry breaking
to observed particlesmust be some sort of interactionthat isfeltby these
particles.There are two leading candidates.One mechanism isprovided by
the 5(7(3) x SU(2) x (7(1)gauge interactionsthemselves, to be discussed
in Section 28.6.The other is gravitation,or rather the auxiliaryfieldsthat
are superpartners of the gravitationalfield,to be discussed in Sections
31.4 and 31.7.
  Without going into details here, we can make a crude estimate of
the supersymmetry-breaking scale Ms for these two possibilities.For
gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking, we expect that the mass
     between the observed quarks, leptons, and gauge bosons and their
splitting
superpartners would be of order g2/l6n2 or g/2/167i2or g2/167i2 (where
g5,g, and g' are the 517(3),517(2),and 17(1)gauge couplings),depending
on which quantum numbers are carried by the supermultiplet in question.
(This guess is verifiedin Section 28.6.) Hence if the squarks, sleptons,
and gauginos have masses in the range of 100 GeV to 10 TeV, as argued
at the end of Section 28.1, then the supersymmetry-breaking scale Ms
would be higher by two or three orders of magnitude — say, of order 100
TeV. On the other hand, ifitis gravitation that serves as the mediator of
196               28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

supersymmetry breaking, then on dimensional grounds we would expect
the mass splittingsAm between the observed particlesand their super-
partners to be of order y/GMj, or perhaps of order GM$. (Results of
both sortswillbe encountered in models described in Section 31.7.)If the
squarks, sleptons,and gauginos have masses in the range of 100 GeV to
10 TeV, then Ms would be of order 1011 GeV for Am « y/GMJ, or 1013
GeV for Am « GMj.
  The large differencein estimates of the supersymmetry-breaking scale
Ms for gauge- and gravitation-mediated supersymmetry breaking makes
an important differencein particlephenomenology        and cosmology. As
already mentioned  several times, supersymmetry   dictatesthat the graviton
must have a partner of spin 3/2, the gravitino. When supersymmetry is
spontaneously broken at a scale M$, the gravitino acquires a mass mg of
order yJGMl. (A preciseformula willbe given in Section 31.3.)For gauge-
mediated supersymmetry breaking, this is very small; if Ms « 100 TeV
then mg « 1 eV, so the gravitino would be by far the lightestof the new
                                       — that is,the
particlesrequired by supersymmetry                    lightestparticlewith
negative R parity(28.1.6). On the other hand, for gravitationallymediated
supersymmetry breaking    the  gravitino mass is just of the same order of
magnitude y/GMJ    as the mass  splittingbetween known particlesand their
superpartners, so the gravitino would have roughly the same mass as the
squarks, sleptons,and gauginos. The gravitino then might or might not
be the lightestparticlewith negative R parity,but itsinteractionswith
known particlesand their superpartners in thiscase are of gravitational
strength,so that gravitinos would play no direct role in experiments on
elementary particles.
                                  * * *
  There are limitson the number of gravitinosthat could survivefrom the
big bang, which set useful constraintson the scale Ms of supersymmetry
breaking. At some point in the distant past the temperature T was
presumably high enough so that even purely gravitational interactions
would have kept gravitinos in thermal equilibrium with other particles,
in which case the number density of gravitinos would have been of the
order of T3, roughly the same as the number density of photons. (We
are using units in which the Boltzmann constant ks as well as h and c
are equal to unity.) If gravitinos do not annihilate or decay, then the
expansion of the universe will lower their number density in the same
way as the number density of photons, so even after the gravitinos go
out of equilibrium they would be present in numbers comparable to those
of photons. More precisely,since the photons but not the gravitinos are
heated by the annihilation of other particles,the number density ngo of
gravitinos at present would be one or two orders of magnitude lessthan
                 283   Where is Supersymmetry Broken?                197

the number   density nyo of photons in the cosmic microwave radiation
background. In order for the mass density mgngo of the gravitinos not to
exceed the upper bound on the cosmic mass density set by the observed
value of the Hubble constant, mg would have to be less8than about 1
keV. As we have seen, this limit is well satisfiedin theories of gauge-
mediated supersymmetry breaking, where the gravitino is too light for
cosmic gravitinos to contribute appreciably to the mass density of the
universe. Since some of the fieldsthat break supersymmetry in these
theories must interactat least indirectlywith the known quark, lepton,
and gauge fieldsin order for the known particlesto show the effectsof
supersymmetry breaking, the interactionsof the gravitino with the known
particlesand their superpartners are suppressed only by powers of gauge
and Yukawa coupling constants, so allthe superpartners of the quarks,
leptons,and gauge bosons would decay quickly into these known particles
and gravitinos. Thus these particlesalso do not provide candidates in
these models for the 'missing mass' sought by cosmologists.(Itis possible
that conservation laws could keep some particlesof the supersymmetry-
breaking sector stable,in which case they could conceivably serve as the
missing mass.)
  On the other hand, for supersymmetry breaking that is gravitationally
mediated, gravitinos are heavy enough to be unstable (though gravitino
annihilationisstillnegligible),so the above limitneed not apply.9 We will
see in Section 31.3 that the coupling of the gravitino to other fieldsis
proportional to y/G9 so on dimensional grounds the decay rate Tg of a
gravitino at restis roughly of the order of Gm3g. This is to be compared
with the rate of expansion of the universe, which at temperature T is of
order JgT*. (We are here ignoring factors of order 10-100, including
those involving non-gravitationalcoupling constants and the number of
particlespecies.)When the cosmic temperature drops to the value T « mg
at which gravitinos become non-relativistic, the ratio of their decay rate
to the expansion rate is of order y/Gmg   =
                                            mg/mpianck < 1, so gravitino
decay becomes significantonly after this time, when the gravitinos are
highly non-relativistic.As we have seen, theirnumber density will be of
order T3, so their energy density will then be of order mgT3, which is
greater than the energy density of order T4 of the photons and other
particlesin thermal equilibrium at temperature T, and therefore makes
the dominant contribution to the cosmic gravitationalfieldthat governs
the rate of expansion of the universe. The expansion rate under these
conditions is therefore of order JGmgT39   and gravitino decay becomes
significantwhen this equals the gravitino decay rate of order Gm3g, and
thereforeat a temperature

                            Te « Gl»ml/3 ■
198               28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

  As we have seen,ifthese gravitinosdid not decay before the present then
theirmass had betterbe lessthan 1 keV, but they can lead to cosmological
          even ifthey did decay before now. After they decay, theirenergy
difficulties
must go into the energy of photons and other relativistic particles,so the
temperature Tg  after decay  is related to the temperature Tg calculated
above by the energy conservation condition mg Tg « T'4, and hence



In particular,since Tg < mg, we have Tg > Tg. If Tg were less than
the temperature Tn ~ 0.1 MeV at which cosmological nucleosynthesis
can occur, then gravitinoswould stillbe abundant before nucleosynthesis,
giving a higher energy density and hence a fasterexpansion, so that there
would be lesstime for free neutrons to decay before being incorporated
into complex nuclei, and hence more helium would be produced when
nucleosynthesis occurs. Also, the ratio of the photon and baryon
     would have been subsequently increased by gravitino decay, so this
densities
ratio at the time of nucleosynthesis would have been considerably less
than is usually estimated from the present cosmic microwave background
temperature, and so nuclear reactions would have incorporated neutrons
more completely into helium, and less deuterium would be left today.
The present agreement between theory and observation for the cosmic
helium and deuterium abundances would thus be destroyed. This problem
is avoided if Tg > 0.1 MeV, but itcan also be avoided under the much
weaker condition that Tg > 0.4 MeV, because then after the gravitinos
decay the temperature would have been high enough to break up the
excess helium and give cosmological nucleosynthesis a fresh startas the
universe recools.This condition requires that mg > 10 TeV, which isjust
barely consistent with the upper bound derived in Section 28.1 on the
masses of the superpartners of the known quarks, leptons, and gauge
bosons, which for gravitationallymediated supersymmetry breaking are
of order mg. This limit on mg corresponds to a supersymmetry-breaking
scale Ms > 1011 GeV for mg « y/GMJ or Ms > 1013 GeV for mg « GMJ.



       28.4    The Minimal    Supersymmetric    Standard Model

In the previous sectionwe identifiedtwo differentways that the breakdown
of supersymmetry at a high energy scale Ms could be communicated to
the known quarks and leptons:through gauge or gravitationalsuperfields.
The supersymmetry-breaking terms in the resultinglow-energy effective
Lagrangian willthen be suppressed by powers of gauge couplings or the
Newton constant. Most of these terms will therefore be rather small,
           28.4 The Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model                 199

with the exception that, along with factors of gauge couplings or the
Newton constant, on dimensional grounds the mass terms and other
superrenormalizable terms in the effectiveLagrangian willbe proportional
to one or more factors of the supersymmetry-breaking scale M$, which
is quite large compared with known particlemasses. We can conclude
then that, to a fair approximation for gauge-mediated supersymmetry
breaking and a very good approximation for gravitationallymediated
supersymmetry breaking, the main effectof supersymmetry breaking will
be in the superrenormalizable terms of the effectiveLagrangian of the
supersymmetric standard model. This version of the standard model,10
which is supersymmetric except for superrenormalizable terms, is usually
known as the minimal supersymmetric standard model
  With R parity or B—L conserved, the most general superrenormalizable
Lagrangian density allowed by 5 1/(3)x 5 1/(2)x 1/(1)gauge symmetry takes
the form
                                         &
    *sr = ~ £ M*<*($£j)       -
                                  £ M*       (*J*,)
                                                      "
                                                          £ Mtf^frj)
             y                     y                       y

           -EM5*(*to)-5>j*(*fr)
              y                    y
           —                —               —
             (^3 mgiuinofaJ   (fa Wwino faJ   (fa ^binofaJ


               y                         y


               y                          y
           -                        -
               £ c«5h" {*J*i)*j         E CH hu (*J*\)«j
                y                        y
                           + H.c.                                      (28.4.1)
           -Bii^le^x)
Script lettersare used here to denote the scalar components of left-
chiral superfields.Sums over 51/(2) and color indices are understood, as
necessary for invariance under 51/(3) x 51/(2) x 1/(1),with e the usual
antisymmetric 2x2 matrix iai.All coefficientsmay be complex, and the
gaugino masses may involve terms proportional to the y$ as well as the
unit matrix.
  We follow the custom here of writing the coefficientsof the terms
involving scalarfieldsbut not theiradjoints as equal to the coefficientsof
the corresponding supersymmetric J^-terms in Eq. (28.1.7)times factors
4y, Afp A\j9 and B. This is motivated by the consideration that the
smallness of the Yukawa couplings of the light quarks in Eq. (28.1.7)
reflectsa number of approximate chiralsymmetries that ifextended to the
200               28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

whole supermultiplet would also make the corresponding trilinearterms
in Eq. (28.4.1)small, while the appearance of the //-term in Eq. (28.1.7)
violatesa possible Peccei-Quinn4 symmetry that if approximately valid
would make both \iand B\i small.Similar considerations suggest the form
in which we write the coefficientsof the terms that involve both scalars
and their complex conjugates. Also, in Section 31.4 we will describe
contributions to Ah and Bfi that really are proportional to h and //,
respectively.However, here we are leaving it an open question whether
the Ah, Ch, and Bp coefficientsin Eq. (28.4.1)are necessarilysmall when
the corresponding h and \icoefficientsin Eq. (28.1.7)are small.
  The C/i-terms in Eq. (28.4.1)have generally been omitted in discussions
of the minimal supersymmetric standard model. This is partly because, as
discussed in Section 27.7,terms likethese that involve the ^-components
of left-chiralscalar superfields and also their complex conjugates can
potentiallyproduce quadratic divergences and thereby raise fine-tuning
problems. But we saw in Section 27.7 that the quadratic divergences occur
only in 'tadpole'graphs in which a scalar fieldline disappears into the
vacuum, and in the minimum supersymmetric standard model there are no
scalarsthat are neutral under all gauge symmetries, and hence no scalar
tadpoles.The C/i-terms are absent in the theoriesof gravitationally
     supersymmetry breaking discussed in Section 31.6, and small in the
mediated
theoriesof gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking described in Section
28.6,but there isno reason to suppose that thiswill always be the case.
  Even though they are not supersymmetric, superrenormalizable
           like those in Eq. (28.4.1)are shown in Section 27.7 to not
interactions
produce supersymmetry-violating ultraviolet-divergentcorrections to the
coefficientsof the supersymmetric d = 4 interactions.The condition of
supersymmetry that isimposed on the dimensionless couplings of the
     supersymmetric standard model thereforedoes not get in the way of
minimal
the cancellationof ultravioletdivergences by renormalization of coupling
constants.It was this property, rather than any theory of supersymmetry
breaking in a high energy hidden sector,that motivated the introduction
of the minimal supersymmetric standard model in Reference 10.
  The best reason today for studying the implications of the
        standard model is that, as already mentioned, theories in which
supersymmetric
supersymmetry is spontaneously broken at a high energy scale are
     described by the minimal supersymmetric standard model at much
naturally
lower energies.We can explore the phenomenological implications of the
supersymmetric standard model, and be reasonably confident that the
     willbe relevantwhatever detailedmodel of supersymmetry breaking
results
and itsmediation turns out to be correct.
  Even without the C/i-terms, if all of the other coefficientsin the
Lagrangian are constrained only by gauge symmetries and R parity
           28.4 The Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model            201

conservation, the minimal supersymmetric standard model will contain
over 100 free parameters.11 Here 'minimal' means nothing more than that
the theory contains only a minimal menu of superfields.Sometimes the
term 'minimal supersymmetric standard model' is reserved for models
that also satisfyrestrictionson the coefficientsof the superrenormaliz-
able terms, motivated either by some underlying theory or by empirical
constraints.For instance,the minimal supersymmetric standard model is
sometimes optimisticallyassumed to satisfythe universalityconditions
                   =        =       =       =       =
             MfjQ      MfjD    MfjV   MfjL     Mfj'E M2Sij ,
                     =
             Wgluino Wwino = ^bino ,                             (28.4.2)
             A?u =A% tJ= aV -~~ A '         -C$ u = CVu = 0 '
                                        CP. ~~
                            *J           *J
Often these conditions are imposed at the scale Mx « 1016 GeV of
coupling constant unification,with corrections produced only by the
renormalization group flow to lower energies. We will not be making
such assumptions here.
  In analyzing the phenomenological implications of the minimal super-
symmetric standard model, we must deal not only with the search for
new particles,but also with two classes of severe empirical constraint
on processes involving known particles:the experimental upper bounds
on various flavor non-conserving processes,and on various modes of CP
non-conservation.



                     Flavor Changing    Processes

We saw in Section 21.3 that there is an automatic suppression of flavor-
changing processes likeK°-K° oscillationsand K° —► //+/T~in the non-
supersymmetric standard model. This isdue to the feature of this theory,
that it is only the mass splittingsof the quarks that prevent them from
being defined so that each flavoris separately conserved, so the amplitude
of these flavor-changing process must be proportional to several factors
of small quark masses. Also, in this theory lepton flavor is automatically
conserved, so that processes like \i—► ey are absolutely forbidden. These
satisfactoryresultsare put at risk by the presence of squarks and sleptons
in supersymmetric extensions of the standard model, because there is in
general no reason to expect that the squark and slepton mass matrices will
be diagonal in the same basis as the quark and lepton mass matrices.This
does not introduce flavor changing in the interactionof these particles
with gauge bosons, which are flavor-independent, but it can produce
flavor-changing transitionsin which squarks or sleptons turn into quarks
or leptons with the emission or absorption of gauginos. Of course, there
202                 28 Supersymmetric Standard Models


               dL                  Di        T>2    T>z          sL


                        gluino v                          b gluino

                                                          &
             —<               <L---<--«                          4-
              sL               Vi   T>2 T>3                    0?L


Figure 28.1. A one-loop diagram that can contributeto the AS = 2 effective
interaction{siy^di)(siy^di)in the supersymmetric standard model. Here solid
linesare quarks; dashed linesare squarks; and combined solidand wavy lines
are gluinos.


is no problem if the squarks and sleptons are degenerate, in which case
theirmass matrices are diagonal in any basis.
   The most stringent limits on squark mass splittingsand/or mixing
angles are set by measurements of K°-K° transitions.12   These transitions
are produced by operators in the effectivelow-energy Lagrangian density
like {sLy^di^iJiy^di), which can be produced by diagrams like Figure
28.1. The superpartners of the quarks di and sl are in general linear
combinations £,- Vdi@>iand £,- VsiS>iof squarks 3>iof definitemass, where
Vjtisa 3 x 3 unitary matrix, so the two squark propagators in thisdiagram
contribute a factor
                            vav:                            sj
                                                        v'iv',i
                    £                        x E                 '
                        k2 + Mf-        ie          k2 + M) - ie

where k is the four-momentum       circulatingin the loop. Because Vp is
unitary, this vanishes if the three squark masses Mi are all equal. If the
squark square masses differfrom some common value Ms2 k by relatively
small amounts AM2, then thisbecomes


                                                   Y^VdtV^M}
                   ,k2 + M2quark -fey
The amplitude for d\Jl —► s^dh has dimensionality mass-2, so after
multiplying by the gluino propagators and four factors of the strong
coupling gs,and integratingover /c,we must get an amplitude proportional
to


                                                                      (28.4.3)
           28.4 The Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model             203

where M isthe larger of Msquark and mgiuino-This may be compared with
the resultfor this amplitude in the non-supersymmetric standard model,
which is produced by W exchange, as shown in Figure 28.2.Ignoring the
third generation of quarks, which has only small transitionamplitudes to
the firsttwo generations, the amplitudes for d —> u, d —► c, s —> u and
s —► c by W~ emission are, respectively,cos 0C, — sin0C, sin0C, and cos 0C,
where 0C is the Cabibbo angle defined in Section 21.3. Hence in place of
the squark propagators here we have the quark propagators
                             /      + mu
                                 iljt            + mc \
                                              iljt
                                      —--               ,
               sin0ccos0c(                  y2,    2—-)

and in place of the strong coupling gs here we have the SU(2) coupling
g. Thus in the non-supersymmetric standard model the amplitude for
diJZ —► sidi is proportional to

                      g4 sin26C cos2 6C /      \2
                              1       -(mc-mu)    ,               (28.4.4)

with a proportionalitycoefficientof the same order as that in Eq. (28.4.3).
With a plausibleguess on how to calculatethe K°-K° transitionamplitude
from the amplitude for diJl —► SLd^ the amplitude corresponding to
Figure 28.2 isknown to give a resultin good agreement with experiment.
(Indeed, Gaillard and Lee13 used thiscalculationto predict that mc « 1.5
GeV, before the c quark was discovered.) It therefore seems reasonable
to require that the squark exchange result(28.4.3)should be lessthan the
quark exchange result(28.4.4).  This yields the condition

         l^i/ t/*^lI ^< g2 sin0c cos0c (mc-mu)M          *        n*A*\
         \2. VdiVsi-r7T\       2            2                     (28.4.5)


Taking g2/4;r = 0.036, g2/4;r = 0.118, sin0c = 0.22, mw      = 80.4 GeV,
mc = 1.5 GeV, and mu < mc, we find

                  ,*AM2I < 1.5 x 10"J x
          EVdiK                         (M/lOOGeV).               (28.4.6)
                     M2

The squark masses are unlikely to be much lessthan mgiuino,so we can
conclude that either the squark masses are splitby no more than about
one part in 103,or the non-diagonal terms of the mixing matrix Vp are less
than about 10~3, or the squarks are heavier than about 10 TeV, or we have
some combination of nearly degenerate squarks, nearly zero mixing angles,
and heavy squarks. In itself, thisresultonly constrains the superpartners
3>i of the left-handed  quarks of charge —e/3, but similar limitson the
masses and mixing angles of the Q}\squarks can be obtained by considering
the amplitude for dRSR —► sr^r. We can also obtain somewhat weaker
204               28 Supersymmetric Standard Models


                              uL   cL   tL            SL



                       W'sl                  ^   w+

                <
                sL            uL   Cl   ti


Figure 28.2. A one-loop diagram that can contributeto the AS = 2 effective
interaction              in both the supersymmetric and non-supersymmetric
          {siy^di)(diy^sL)
standardmodels.Here solidlinesare quarks and wavy linesare W± bosons.


limitson the masses and mixing angles of the %{ squarks by considering
the amplitudes produced by wino exchange rather than gluino exchange.
It should be noted, however, that these arguments put no constraints
on the differencesbetween the masses of squarks of differentcharge, or
on the differencesbetween the masses of the superpartners i?,and J2;of
left-handed quarks and antiquarks.
  Just as for the squarks, the sleptons of definitemass are expected to
be non-diagonal linearcombinations of the superpartners of the leptons.
This leads to the decay process \i—► e + y through diagrams like Figure
28.3.The experimental upper bound 4.9 x 10~n on the branching ratioof
thisprocess then setsa limitof about 10~3 on the fractionalmass splitting
of sleptons of the same charge but differentgenerations for generic mixing
angles,or on the mixing angles for non-degenerate sleptons.14
  Attempts have been made to explain the degeneracy of the squarks
and sleptons in terms of a gauge symmetry connecting the different
generations.14aIn Section 28.6 we will describe an approach to super-
symmetry breaking in which this degeneracy appears without needing to
impose such symmetries.



                              CP violation

The second important classof constraint provided by experimental
        about known particleshas to do with CP-violating effects,such
information
as the electricdipole moments of the neutron and electron.15In Section
21.3 we saw that these effectsare rather weak in the non-supersymmetric
standard model with only one scalar doublet, apart from a potential
problem with the parameter 0 of quantum chromodynamics, discussed in
           28.4 The Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model             205


                              bino, wino




                \i       Ci hi                         e


                                                       Y




                                 wino




Figure 28.3. One-loop diagrams forthe process\i—► e + y. Here solidlinesare
leptons;dashed linesare sleptons;combined solidand wavy linesare gauginos;
and wavy linesare photons.


Section 23.6. This is because all CP-violating phases in the mass matrix
of quarks and leptons and theirinteractionwith gauge bosons could be
absorbed into the definitionof the quark and lepton fieldsif there were
only two generations of quarks and leptons,and although there isa third
generation, its mixing with the firsttwo generations is (for mysterious
reasons) quite weak. (This argument does not apply to processes that
directlyinvolve quarks of the third generation, such as B°-B° mixing, to
be measured in the planned 'B factories.') The electricdipole moment of
the neutron in this simple non-supersymmetric version of the standard
model is consequently expected16 to be lessthan about 10~30e cm, well
below the experimental upper bound, 6.3 x 10~26e cm.16a
  In contrast,the over 100 parameters of the minimum supersymmetric
standard model in itsmost general form involve dozens of CP-violating
relativephases. After integrating out the heavy superpartners of the
known particles,these phases produce a number of CP-violating
effective
    interactionsto be added to the Lagrangian of the standard model.
Those of minimum     dimensionality, which on dimensional grounds are
likelyto be the most  important, include electricdipole moments of the
quarks and leptons,17similarCP-violating 'chromoelectric'dipole moments
206                  28 Supersymmetric Standard Models




                  uL,dL      U,2)         U,D        urM


Figure 28.4. A one-loopdiagram forthe chromoelectricdipolemoment of the u
or d quarks.Here solidlinesare quarks; dashed linesare squarks;combined solid
and wavy linesare gluinos;and the wavy lineisa gluon. The X representsthe
insertionof a bilinearinteractionarisingfrom a trilinear scalarfieldinteraction
combined with the spontaneous breakdown of 51/(2)x 1/(1).There are also
diagrams in which the gluon lineisattachedto one of the internalsquark lines
insteadof to the gluino line.


contributing to the interactionsof gluons with quarks,18 a CP-violating
purely gluonic interaction,19and a CP-violating interactionof the lightest
Higgs scalarwith leptons.20
  To take one example, consider the quark chromoelectric dipole
       which in some models make the largestcontribution to the electric
moments,
dipole moment of the neutron. The CP-violating chromoelectric dipole
moment operator is {qysly^,yv]Aaq)f£v (where q is a u or d color-triplet
quark field,fgv is the SU(3) field-strengthtensor, and Xa are the 3 x 3
generators of SU(3)). Since 75[y^, yv] has matrix elements only between
qi and qR or between qR and q^ in order for a one-loop graphs to
contribute to the chromoelectric dipole moment an external left-handed u
or d quark linemust emit an internalgluino lineand turn into a fy or 2
squark line,which next turns into a #* or 3>* squark line,and then into a
right-handed u or d quark line by absorbing the internalgluino line,with
the external gluon lineattached eitherto the internalgluino lineor to one
of the internalsquark lines.(See Figure 28.4.)
  To calculate this,we need to know the mixing of the scalar
      Wi (or 3)\)of the left-chiral
components                         quark superfieldsQi with the complex
conjugates <%*j(or 3)*j)of the scalar components of the left-chiralanti-
quark superfieldsUj (or Dj)9 produced by the spontaneous breakdown of
SU(2) x [/(l),and represented by the X in Figure 28.4.Part of this
    arisesfrom a contribution of the supersymmetric ^-term interaction
mixing
(28.1.7)to the lastterm in Eq. (26.4.7):

      &&*   =
                "I £tijV&j    + H^°\\2 - I£hfjQtQj     + jiJf§|2.    (28.4.7)
           28.4 The Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model                           207

There isalso a contribution from the A- and C-terms in Eq. (28.4.1):



                       ~                              - H.c.
                           E tijW&j [Au ^2 + Cjj Jff]                            (28.4.8)
                            y
Replacing the neutral Higgs scalar fieldswith their expectation values
gives the quadratic terms
          = -2 Re                               cot P + Ajj + Cfj cot
     &&              Y^ mYjW&j             (V                            jff)
                      V
             -2 Re
                     Y^m?j@i@j(»                (tan0)* + A? - Cj (tanjff)*)
                                                                           , (28.4.9)
                      y
where m^ = (J^)^      and mj? = -(3tf\)hfjare the mass matrices of the
quarks of charge 2e/3 and — e/3, and
                                 tanjff= (Jr§)/(JT?)* .                         (28.4.10)
  Neglecting Cabibbo mixing, and for definitenesstaking the As and Cs
diagonal, Figure 28.4 makes contributions to the chromoelectric dipole
moment of the u and d quarks of the form
                      3
              dcue=      Im
                            [mu A'uI(m®,m*, mgiuino)],        (28.4.11)
                    j^~2
                      3
              <*2*=                                  ,        (28.4.12)
                    i|^2Im [m^^(m^.m^?mgluino)]
where

  A'u = (// + CM)cot£ + AM ,               ^    = (,/ - Q)(tanj8r      + 4, ,   (28.4.13)
and / is a complicated dimensionless function of its arguments arising
from the integration over the virtualfour-momentum. For m^ ~ mj and
the gluino fielddefined to make mgiuinoas well as m^ real,the function /
takes the form

          /(m^m-g, mgiuino)= ^uino J I                   glui"°— I ,            (28.4.14)
                                                     2
                                                   m<2    mgluino,
where21

     J(z) = 2 (-z4 +             +         In            + 2z3 -          .     (28.4.15)
                           ^z3       z2)        (^tf)              yz2
  The hard part of this sort of calculation always liesin estimating the
contribution of an operator like the chromoelectric dipole interaction
to hadronic matrix elements such as the electricdipole moment of the
neutron. We can anticipate that there will be renormalization group
208               28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

corrections required because this operator is to be used at energies of
the order of the neutron mass, rather than the masses of the squarks
and gluino. More important is simply getting dimensional factors and
factorsof 4n right.For this purpose, itis usual to use a counting rule22
known as 'naivedimensional analysis.'A connected graph with Vt vertices
of type i and / internal lines will have a number L of loops given by
L = I — ^2tVi + I.If there are JVjlinesattached to a vertex of type i and
N external linesof the whole graph, then 21 + N = ^2t ViNi9 so

                               +
                    L-.-2          EK,(f-.).
                                    i    x

We expect a factor of order 1/I6n2 for each loop, so the coefficientof
an operator (9in the low-energy effectiveLagrangian with JV fieldfactors
willcontain an over-allfactor


                                   i
If the operator (9 has dimensionality d and the interactions(9[of type i
have dimensionality d„ then the coefficientof (9 willhave dimensionality
4 —d —5^(4 —dj), so thiscoefficientwillalso have a factorM4~d Y[tMdi~4,
where M is some scale that is typical of hadronic physics, such as the
nucleon mass or the energy 2nFn ~ 1200 MeV, where the low-energy
expansions discussed in Section 19.5 begin to break down. Finally,the
contribution to the coefficientof (9 from some graph will of course be
proportional to the couplings of allthe operators (9[associated with the
verticesin the graph. These remarks can be conveniently summarized
by defining a 'reduced coupling': the reduced coupling associated with
any operator (9[having JV,-fieldfactors,dimensionality du and coupling
constant gt is
                             =
                      ^reduced g.(4w)2-N/M^-4                  (28.4.16)
The above estimates suggest the rule of naive dimensional analysis: the
reduced coupling of any operator (9in the effectivehadronic Lagrangian is
roughly equal to the product of the reduced couplings of the interactions
that contribute to thiseffectivecoupling.
  The neutron electricdipole moment isthe coefficientof an operator with
one photon and two neutron fieldsand dimensionality 5, so itsreduced
coupling isMden/4n. Likewise, the quark chromoelectric magnetic moment
has reduced coupling Mdcqe/4n. In addition to one factor of thisreduced
coupling, the reduced coupling of the neutron electricdipole operator
must have a factor of the reduced coupling e/4n of the electromagnetic
coupling and an indeterminate number of factors of the reduced strong
coupling gs/4n, which at the low-energy scale M are not very different
          28.5 The Sector of Zero Baryon and Lepton Number           209

from unity and will be ignored. Taking the d quark contribution as
representativeof the contributions of both u and d quarks, the resultthen
isthat
          edce
          -±       (2 \3     r     l
     den«      » e f      Im
                             [mdA'd\l(m®,m^mgMno).              (28.4.17)
                     -^ J
Further simplifyingby settingmgiUino— m® — m& so that J = 7/18, and
taking g2/An at the scale of squark and gluino masses to have the same
value 0.12 as at mz, and \md\ « 7 MeV, we have then

                               Wising     x(lOOGeV)'
        Kl *0.5 x HT»..                                 _       (28A18)
                                        "gluino
where q> is the phase of A'd9with the convention that the gluino, quark,
and squark masses are taken real.The contribution of the electricdipole
moment of the quark is somewhat larger,while the contribution of the
purely gluonic CP-odd operator is considerably smaller.23
  To avoid conflictwith the experimental upper bound of 0.97 x 10~25 e
cm, eitherthe phases associated with CP violationin the supersymmetric
standard model must be lessthan about 10~2, or some of the new particles
of thismodel must be heavier than about 1 TeV. Similar conclusions have
been reached from calculationsof the electricdipole moments of atoms
and molecules.23Even more stringent conditions on CP-violating phases
have been derived24 by considering the contribution of Figure 28.1 to
the one preciselymeasured CP-violating effect,the imaginary part of the
amplitude for K°-K° oscillation.


      28.5   The Sector of Zero Baryon      and Lepton Number

Despite the large number of parameters of the supersymmetric standard
model, in some contexts it is surprisingly predictive. This is true in
particularwhen we consider the scalar fieldswhose vacuum expectation
values spontaneously break the SU(2) x 17(1)gauge symmetry. In this
section we will consider these scalars,along with other fieldsof zero
baryon and lepton number: neutral scalarsodd under charge conjugation,
charged scalars,and the fermionic superpartners of these scalarsand of
the W± and Z°.
  It isa crucialrequirement for supersymmetric versions of the standard
model that they should contain scalardoublet 'Higgs'superfieldswith the
rightmass and interactionparameters to account for the breakdown of the
SC7(2) x 17(1)gauge group of the electromagnetic and weak interactions.
We saw in Section 28.1 that at least two left-chiralscalar doublets are
needed to give mass to the quarks of both charge 2e/3 and — e/3 and
210                     28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

the charged leptons,while we found in Section 28.2 that two doublets are
just what is needed to bring the St/(3),SU(2), and C/(l)gauge couplings
together at some very high energy. We have thereforeassumed that there
are two left-chiralscalar SU(2) doublets


                                                                               (285i)
                    *-(#)•                            *-(§)•
These have SC7(2) and C/(l)D-terms (27.4.7)given (assuming zero Fayet-
Iliopoulos constant £u(i))by

                        D =                       +                            (28.5.2)
                                 |(jrluri)            |(jr5ijr2),
                             =                 r
                        Dy                                      ,              (28.5.3)
                                 \(*\*\)-\(*\*l)
where 3/f\^ are the scalar components of the superfield doublets H\^
and rr are the Pauli matrices, with t, = 1. As shown in Eq. (27.4.9),in
renormalizable theories this gives the D-term contribution to the scalar
fieldpotential

              +
  v.-{»           {*,
          g                                             g'2
                                 +                    + —           -
              (jrjf jri)             (jrjf jt2)          8 (jrjjri)   (^jf2)

                                                                               (28.5.4)
This can be put in a more convenient form by using the relation
                                 •
                             (?)./ (fykj= 28ij8kt~ <5,A; .                     (28.5.5)

(To prove this, use rotational invariance to show that SySu may be
                                          •
expressed as a linearcombination of (t)^ (t)*/and S^Sy, and calculate
the coefficientsby taking traces on the indices i,j and i,?.)In this way,
we may rewritethe D-term part of the scalarfieldpotential as
                                                          -i2
       =                   g2 + g'2           -
    VD                   +                       (>$jf 2)         (28.5.6)
             (jfjjf2)          8     (jrjjri)

  As mentioned in Section 28.1,there isjust one possible renormalizable
term in the superpotential for these two left-chiral
                                                   doublets, of the form

                                 WuH2)       =                                 (28.5.7)
                                                  n(HjeH2),
where n is a constant with the dimensions of a mass and e is the
          matrix h2. According to Eq. (27.4.9),this gives an additional
antisymmetric
          28.5 The Sector of Zero Baryon and Lepton Number                 211

contribution to the scalarfieldpotential

                       \df(JfuJf2y2              df(JfuJf2)
                 "VI       ^        I +V            d^2r

                                                                        (28.5.8)

For // ^ 0 the potential F£> + J^ evidently has a minimum      value of
zero, reached at the unique point 2tf\   =  j?^  =  0- With just these
terms in the potential,SC7(2) x C/(l) as well as supersymmetry is not
spontaneously broken. (The case \i = 0 is not much better; there is
a continuous infinityof vacuum states with supersymmetry unbroken
and with SC7(2) xl/(l) broken down to electromagnetic gauge invariance
with all possible strengths,including zero.) This is one more example
of the general difficulty, already seen in Section 28.3, of formulating
        theoriesin which supersymmetry is spontaneously broken within
realistic
the standard model.
  Under the assumption of the previous section that supersymmetry is
violated in the effectiveLagrangian only by superrenormalizable terms,
the most general such supersymmetry-breaking term involving the scalar
doublets isof the form

       7w = w?(jrjjfi)     +n^(jtrljf2)
                                           +Re
                                                   {Bii(jr]ejr2)}   ,

where m\ and m\ are real parameters (not necessarilypositive)and Bfi is
a parameter of arbitraryphase. We will adjust the over-allphase of the
superfieldsH\ and H2 so that Bp isreal and positive,and so

     Vm = m\ (tf\tfx) + ™\ (tf\tf2) + BuRe          (tfjetfj)
                                                                .       (28.5.9)

The totalscalar potentialin the tree approximation is then

        V = VD + v. + Vm

                                  g2 + g'2          -
                             +
              2 (jr\jr2)              8    (jtJjTi)   (jr$jr2)

             +{m\ + \tf) (jtIjTi) + (m22+ \fi\2)
                                              (je\je2)
             +                      .                               (28.5.10)
                 BfiRe(jf]eJf2)
Note in particularthat //2,m2, and m\ only appear in the combinations
m\ + |/*|2and m\ + |/*|2.
  There is one condition on the supersymmetry-breaking parameters m2,
derived from the requirement that the potentialshould be bounded below.
For scalar fieldsgoing to infinityin generic directions,the potential is
212                  28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

dominated by the quartic terms Vd, which are positive.There are special
directionsin which Vd vanishes: those for which (up to an SU(2) x 1/(1)
gauge transformation)
                                                            0
                    Jfi =                     Jf2 =

with <j>an arbitrarycomplex quantity. For such directions,V = (2|//|2    +
   +        — Bixcf)2,
                     so (sinceBp  has been  defined to be positive)in order
m] m2)\(j>\2
for thisnot to go to —oo as <j>—► +00, itis necessary that

                            llnf + ml + ml^Bn.                               (28.5.11)
  We wish to look for a minimum of the potential at which
      gauge invariance is not broken, so let us consider the behavior of
electromagnetic
the potential as a function of the neutral scalar fields,with the charged
scalarfieldsset equal to zero.In thiscase Eq. (28.5.10)gives the potential
of the neutral scalarsas
                  g2+g'2 r       ~
                                          2
           FN =                             + (™1 + M2)
                           \^°l\2 \^l\}                   \#\
                                     ~ B/*Re                       •
                    +(r4 + \n\2)\^2\         (^1^2)                          (28.5.12)

To find a stationary point, we expand         FN   around the constant values
Jff?= vt,writing

                                ^   = Vi+ cpt.                               (28.5.13)
To second order in the <pi9Eq. (28.5.12)gives

         gl + g
 "quad              (\viI2- \v2\2)         -      +      -
                                 [2Re{vl<pi v*2q>2) Wx |2 \<p2\7
           gl + g
                                          + (mJ +                   +
                      [Re(»,>i-»5<p2)]2               |Ai|2)(2ReoJ<pi |^1|2)
                                       -
         +{m\ + \n\2)(2Rev2(p2 + \n\2)   BuRe               {vX(pi+ v2(pi+ (pi(p2)
         + constant.                                                         (28.5.14)
For the vt to be equilibrium values of the fields,the terms of firstorder in
the q>imust vanish

               +          +               -          -        = 0 , (28.5.15)
         (m2       \fi\2)vl Z-±^(\Vl\2        \v2\2)vl ^Bfiv2

               +          +               -             -               = 0 . (28.5.16)
         (mi       \»\2)v2 L±*L(|»2|2         \vi\2y2           \bhvx
Without changing the over-allphase of the <jp,-,
                                             we may adjust theirrelative
phases so that v\ isreal.Then Eqs. (28.5.15)and  (28.5.16)show that vi is
            28.5 The Sector of Zero Baryon and Lepton Number                         213

also real,so that these equations become
                              >2 , na
                                         -      - X-Biiv2= 0 ,
             (m\ +          +
                     \n\2)Vl l^-      (v2 vl)vx                                  (28.5.17)

                                                      -
             (m2 + M2)i>2 + 1^*-                (v\       v\y2 -l-Bixvx=0.       (28.5.18)

These conditions may be used to express the mass parameters in the
potentialin terms of the convenient quantities
                                      tenp = v2/vi ,                             (28.5.19)

                              m2z={(g2         + g'2)(v2+ v2),                   (28.5.20)
and
                                J- —=
                               mzA 2\n\z+mi+mj.                                  (28.5.21)
(The parameter mz is the mass of the Z vector boson.* We will soon
see that mA is the mass of one of the physical scalars.) Multiplying
Eqs. (28.5.17)and (28.5.18),respectively,by v2 and v\ and taking the sum
and differencegives

                                     Bfi = mfa sin2/?,                           (28.5.22)
and
                              ~~          ~
                         mi        m2 =        (m^ + mz)cos2)5 ,                 (28.5.23)
which with Eq. (28.5.21)yields

m\+\ii\2= {m2A-{{m2A+m2z)cos2p,     m22+\lA2 = \m2A+\{m2A+m2z)cos2p.
                                                               (28.5.24)
With linear terms cancelling,the quadratic part (28.5.14)of the neutral
scalar potentialmay then be written
                  nr'2
       =                                  "             g2 + g'2
 '/miioH
  quad                                               +
           LjjpI(t>?-»2)[lpl|2                 \<P2\2} ^^[Re^KPi             -V2(p2)]'
                            + (ml                         - BuRe
                                              + \n\2)\(p2\2                 + constant
           +(m? + \n\2)\<pi\2                                        (cpi<p2)
      =
           ^zcos2p\\<pi\2-\<p2\:               + m\ [Re (cospcpi — sinp(p2)]

           + >2          +            _ ,(w2 + w2              -
                  ^,2         )V2|2^              )cos2p[\<p1\2 \cp2\2]
           —m\ sin2/?Re (q>\(p2j+ constant.                                      (28.5.25)


*Thereisa difference
                  ofa factor
                           of2 betweentheformulasform| givenby Eqs.(28.5.20)
 and (21.3.30),
             due tothefactthatthescalarfields
                                            arenormalized ifferently
                                                                   hereand
 inSection21.3.
214                  28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

  We see from Eq. (28.5.25)that the real and imaginary parts of the cpi
are decoupled. (This is because the potential (28.5.12)is invariant under
a charge conjugation or CP transformation cpi—► cp*.)The mass-squared
matrix of the imaginary parts of the cpiis

                 / \m2A{\-cos20)              \m\ sin2jS
                                              "            \
                                                                 .   (28.5.26)
      M2lm(p=[
                 \         \m2As\nip     \m2A(l+cos2P)     J

The determinant vanishes, so one eigenvalue is zero, and the other equals
the trace,which isjust m2A. The zero-mass scalar is of course the neutral
Goldstone boson associated with the spontaneous breakdown of S 17(2)x
[7(1)to electromagnetic gauge invariance,and as discussed in Chapter 21
itiseliminated by the Higgs mechanism. As promised, rriAis the mass of
one of the physical scalars,the non-Goldstone boson with C negative.This
shows that for the fieldvalue <pi= vt to be at leasta local minimum of
the potential,the parameter m2A defined by Eq. (28.5.21)must be positive.
The condition (28.5.11)for good behavior at large fieldstrengths shows
that Eq. (28.5.22)has a solution here for p in the range 0 < p < n/2.
  In particular,if Bfi = 0 and 0 < p < n/2, then Eq. (28.5.22)shows that
yyia= 0. In this case, the particleA is the Goldstone boson of a [7(1)
Peccei-Quinn symmetry4 of the potential (28.5.12)under an equal phase
change of jtf\ and Jf §, which for v\ ^ 0 and V2 ^ 0 is spontaneously
broken without leaving any combination of thisand the electroweak [7(1)
symmetry unbroken. This is the original version of the axion,25 which
as we saw in Section 23.6 acquires only a small mass from the Yukawa
interactionsof the scalarswith the quarks and is experimentally ruled out.
Thus we can conclude that Bfi definitelydoes not vanish.
  The elements of the mass-squared matrix for the real scalarsare given
by Eq. (28.5.25)as

                     = ±m2A(l-cos2P)+    im2(l+cos2£),
            (M£e>
                     =                                ,              (28.5.27)
            (A#L*)i2   (A#L*)2i =-{(m2A+m2z)sm2p
            (A#L*)22=        {m2A(l+cos2P)+      im2(l-cos2£).

Solving the secular equation gives the eigenvalues

         m2H =
                 -         + m| + yJ{m2A+ m|)2 - 4m2Am2z cos2
                     [m^                                      20] , (28.5.28)

          ml = \[m2A+m2z-          y/(m2A+m2z)2 -4m2Am2z cos22/?] . (28.5.29)

  To calculatethe masses of the charged scalars,we evaluate the potential
               28.5 The Sector of Zero Baryon and Lepton Number               215

V with the neutral scalarsset equal to theirvacuum           expectation values:

                «*i = ( I-         ) ,      *2=(       *?)   •          (28.5.30)

Using this in Eq. (28.5.10)then gives the quadratic part of the charged
scalar potential!

           =              +        +            -           "
   ^uad        y \V2W7Y     »\*tf     Mr"(i;l      ^)(l^n2     l^2+!2)
               +{m\ + |ji|2)|
                          jfi\2 + {m22+ |ji|2)|JTj|2
                                                  + B/jLJtTTJtrt.(28.5.31)

Using Eqs. (28.5.22)and (28.5.24),this may be written

           =                                 -cos2^)    + W\\\\   + cos2/J)
      ^qCuad \(rn2w +m2)[|^rl2U

                  +2sin2j»jrrjrj] ,                                     (28.5.32)
where m^       isthe charged gauge boson mass:

                      m2^ = ^g2(|^|2 + |^2|2).                          (28.5.33)

The charged scalarmass matrix isthen

          Ml = -1{m]v+                                                  (28.5.34)
                       m\)^              sin2^     l+coPs2p).
This has determinant zero, so ithas one eigenvalue equal to zero and the
other eigenvalue equal to the trace

                                     m2c = m2w+m2A.                     (28.5.35)
The zero-mass charged scalar is of course the other Goldstone boson
associated with the spontaneous breakdown of SU(2) x [/(l),and like
the neutral Goldstone boson found earlierit is eliminated by the Higgs
mechanism.
  Even without knowing the parameters mA and /?,these resultstellus
a lot about the relativemagnitudes of the scalar boson masses. We can
rewrite Eqs. (28.5.28)and (28.5.29)in the form

                      -
           m2H =          [m2A+m2z
                                   + y/(m2A-m2z)2 + 4m2Am2z sin22fi\, (28.5.36)

               ml =
                      -         + m| - \j(m2A- m|)2 + 4m2Am2z sin2    .
                          [m2                                     2j8] (28.5.37)
We see that the heavier neutral scalar mass mn is larger than the larger
ofmz and mA, while the lighterneutralscalar mass mh issmaller than the
smaller of mz and mA. If the large ratio of top to bottom quark masses
is due to a large ratio V2/V1 = tan/? of scalar fieldvacuum expectation
values, rather than a large ratio of Yukawa couplings, then we expect
216                   28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

P to be near tt/2,in which case these inequalitiesbecome approximate
equalities.Further, Eq. (28.5.35)shows that the charged scalar mass is
greater than both mA and mw-
  These resultsare quantitativelymodified by various radiativecorrections
within the standard model (as opposed to radiativeeffectsthat produce
the input parameters m2 in theories of gauge-mediated supersymmetry
breaking). The most important correctionsarisefrom the presence in the
scalar potential V of terms arisingfrom graphs consistingof a singleloop
of top or bottom quarks interactingany number of times with external
scalar fieldlines. This is because the top and bottom quarks have by
far the strongest couplings to 3^2 and jff\9respectively.(It is prudent
to include bottom as well as top quark loops here because, as mentioned
above, the larger mass of the top quark may be due to a large ratio V2/v\,
rather than to a large ratioof Yukawa couplings, but even in thiscase we
willsee that the dominant correctionsare due to top quark loops.)
  Let us firstconsider the neutral scalars,at least one of which would
be lighterthan the Z boson in the absence of radiativecorrections.The
effectof these top and bottom loops is to contribute a term of form
           + Ubd^l2) to FN. We willabsorb any terms in Ub or Ut that
Ut(\Jtf°2\2)
                    —              —
are linearin \3tf\\2   v\ or \3tf\\2 v\ into the input parameters m\ and
m\, so that

                              U'b(vi)= U't(v22)
                                             = 0.                       (28.5.38)
Our earlierresults(28.5.24)and (28.5.22)for m\ + |//|2,ml + \n\2and Bp
are then unchanged. Also, the mass matrix for the C-odd neutral scalars
is stillgiven by Eq. (28.5.26).On the other hand, the elements of the
mass-squared matrix for the C-even neutral scalarsare now given by

           (ML>=          {m2A(l-cos2P)+{m2z(l+cos2P)           + Ab,
                      =                                     ,           (28.5.39)
           (A*L*)i2       (AfL*)2i =-\(m2A+m2z)sm2p
           {Mit(p)22= \m2A(l+cos2p)+         im2(l-cos2£)       + A,,
where

                   Ab = 2v\ U't(v\),        A, = 2v\ U't'(vl).          (28.5.40)
The solutionsof the secular equation are then


      mH = -2 m2A+m2z+&t       + A{>


                                    + At-          + (m2A +                ,
           +]l((mA ~m2z)cos2p               Ab)2            m|)2sin22jS
                                                                        (28.5.41)
            28.5 The Sector of Zero Baryon and Lepton Number                         217

     2      1
                m2A+mz     +At + A*,


                         - m2)cos2£    + A, -           +         + m2
            -]j((m2A                             Ah^        (m2          )2 sin2ip

                                                                                (28.5.42)
In considering searches for these particles,itis important to note that the
lightHiggs mass m/,increasesas the unknown mass rriAincreases,reaching
a finiteupper bound for mA —► oo

    mh < mh(mA -► oo) = m| cos2 2/?+ A, sin2p + Ab cos2 p .                     (28.5.43)
  To calculateA^ and At9 we recallfrom Section 16.2 that the potentials
Ub and Ut are given by

      *0i2                                 AfrJ^j       3
 Ub(\^\z) =                           In                    + linearterms , (28.5.44)
                 -j^\h^                     ™l         "2

                                           7 -&>$
                                                       3
            =              2 -&®\     In                    + linearterms , (28.5.45)
  Ut(\3f°2\2)
                   I6n2                     M2         2

where Xt = mt/v2 and X\>= mt,/v\are the Yukawa couplings of the top and
bottom quarks; Mst and Msb are the masses of the stop and sbottom (the
scalar superpartners of the top and bottom quarks); these masses and the
terms —3/2 insidethe square brackets are chosen to satisfythe condition
that supersymmetry-breaking corrections due to stop and sbottom loops
would cancel the correctionsdue to top and bottom loops if the masses
were equal; and the linear terms' are linear in l^l2 or l<^?l2>with
coefficientsadjusted to satisfyEq. (28.5.38).(The factor 3 takes account
of the three quark colors.)Then Eq. (28.5.40)gives


                                                                                (28•5•46,
     *-->4»Ki)=iSHf)'


                           1^2 | _ 3^/2 m\Gf In I
     A. =                                          ¥f)   ,      (28.5.47)
            -£iW4»§ln      Ml.       lit2sin2/?   Uj

where Gp = 1.17 x 10 5 GeV l is the Fermi coupling constant, given by
Eq. (21.3.34)as GF = g2/4j2m2v. Taking mb = 4.3 GeV, mt = 180 GeV,
Ms, ~ Msb ~ 1 TeV, and mz = 91.2 GeV gives Afc~ 1.1x lO_6m|/cos20
and A, ~ 1.1m|/ sin2/?.We see that even iftan /?isas large as mt/mb, the
top-quark correction At willstillbe much larger than A&.
218                 28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

  The effectof At is to increaseboth mn and m/,.Taking this and other
radiative corrections into account,26 for tan/? > 10 the upper bound
(28.5.43)on the lightestneutral scalar mass is raised by radiative
      from just below mz to between 100 GeV and 110 GeV for stop
corrections
masses between 300 GeV and 1 TeV For comparison, an experimental
lower bound27 of 62.5 GeV on m/,,m/j, and m^ isset by the absence of an
hA or HA finalstatein e+e~ collisionsat 130 to 172 GeV. Also,
calculations
      of radiativecorrections involving Higgs scalarsare consistentwith
precision measurements of electroweak phenomena for m/, in the range27a
of 27 to 140 GeV.
  Radiative corrections are lessimportant for the charged scalars.Since
the attachment of charged scalarlinesallows transitionsbetween top and
bottom quarks, the correction to the scalar fieldpotential here takes a
more general form, constrained by SC7(2) x [7(1)to be

      av = vw\#2,       jrj jTi , jrj jTi , jrj jr2, jr]ejr2) •   (28.5.48)
(Quark loops do not actuallyproduce any dependence on J^JeJ^2.) Every
appearance of a ^f i or tf2 doublet is accompanied with a factor Xt or Xt9
respectively,so terms involving 3/f\ willbe suppressed, as we have already
seen in calculating the neutral scalar masses. To a good approximation,
then, the correction to the effectivepotential is of the form
  AV ~ U(Jf\jf2909 0, 0) = U(\V2 + <Pi\2+ l^fjl2, 0, 0, 0). (28.5.49)

By going back to the case where the charged fieldsvanish, we see that the
function U must be just the same as what was earliercalled Ut. Any terms
in U of firstorder in an expansion in powers of \v2+ <p2\2+ \^2\2 ~ v2
would simply serve to redefinethe constant m\, and are eliminated by the
convention (28.5.38).Terms in U of second order in \v2+ (p2\2+ \J^2\2~v2
are genuine radiative corrections, but although they contain terms of
second order in \(p2\2which do affect the neutral scalar masses, they
contain no terms of second order in \3tf2\2which could shiftthe non-
Goldstone charged scalarmass. Fortunately, radiativecorrectionsare not
needed to avoid a conflictwith experiment, because in the absence of an
upper bound on m^ there is no theoreticalupper bound on the charged
scalar mass (28.5.35).An experimental lower bound28 mc > 59 GeV is
provided by the non-observation of the process e+e~ —► ^+^~      at 181 to
184 GeV There isa much more stringentlower bound on mc provided by
the rate of the process b —► sy (measured in decays likeB —► K*y), which
can occur by transitionsto an intermediate jf~u or tf~c state,with the
photon radiated from the virtual quark or jf~. The present agreement
between theory and experiment for this process sets a lower bound29 of
about 150 GeV on mc (and higher for tan£ < 1).Using Eq. (28.5.35),this
gives an important lower bound m^ > 125 GeV
          28.5 The Sector of Zero Baryon and Lepton Number            219

  There are two conditions on the masses m2 that must be satisfied
by any model of supersymmetry breaking in order to give a successful
account of electroweak symmetry breaking. One of them is provided by
the requirement that the potential is bounded below, which as we have
seen requires that

                              + m\ + m\ > Bfi.
                         2|//|2
Since Bfi is defined to be positive,this ensures that the C-odd neutral
scalar squared mass (28.5.21)is positive.The other condition is provided
                              which for arbitraryvalues of firequire that
by Eqs. (28.5.22)and (28.5.24),

                                (m22+ \n\2)< (Bfi)2.
                    4 (m\ + \fi\2)                              (28.5.50)
We can easily see from Eq. (28.5.10)that thiscondition ensures that the
matrix of second derivativesof the potential has a negative eigenvalue at
jjf! = jjf2 = 0, so this SU(2) x [/(l)-invariantpoint is one of unstable
equilibrium, and therefore SC7(2) x U(l) must be spontaneously broken.
If P is very near 7r/2, then Eq. (28.5.24)tellsus that this condition is
satisfiedby having m2 + \fi\2 positive and m\ + \pi\2negative. As we will
see in the next section,the renormalization group flow of the parameters
in the scalarfieldLagrangian provides a mechanism for driving m\ + |//|2
negative.
  Even with a minimal setof superfields,in supersymmetry theoriesthere
are several pairs of particleswith differentSU(2) x U(l) transformation
properties,but the same charge, color, and baryon and lepton number,
which become mixed when SU(2) x U(l) is spontaneously broken. We
have already seen an example of thisin the previous section,in which we
had to deal with the mixing of the scalar superpartners of the left-handed
quarks with the complex conjugates of the scalar superpartners of the
left-handed antiquarks. A similar mixing occurs between the higgsinos
and gauginos, both charged and neutral; the particlesof definitemass
are not higgsinos or gauginos, but mixtures known as charginos and
neutralinos.Let us consider the charginos, which provide a useful bound
on \i.According to Eq. (27.4.8),there are off-diagonal supersymmetric
mass terms in the Lagrangian density

—Re                + i\/2mw cos piw^eh^L)   + iy/2mw sinP\w£TehYL)]     ,
      \^\Kl€^2l)
To this,we should add a term for the wino mass generated by gauge
interactionswith the supersymmetry-breaking sector

                         -mwinoRe (w£T<nv^) .

The squared chargino masses are then the eigenvalues of the matrix
220                 28 Supersymmetric Standard Models


J(\jtc, where
                     (    mwino       i\/W«M\
             M
                     \ lyjzmw cosp         n       I
These two eigenvalues are

        2       1                                 -
              =                       +                        cos2 20
      ^chargino ^ ^wino + 2m^   + |/x|2                 +
                                          ((m2 ino \n\2)2 4m4^

                                   -                    1/2
                 +4m2w(mlino + \fi\2 2mwinoRe//sin2jS))             (28.5.52)

We expect the wino mass mwino to be much larger than m^. If itis also
much larger than |/4 then the heavier chargino is mostly a wino, with
mass mwin0, while the lightestchargino is mostly a higgsino, with mass
    In any case, \fi\is greater than the lightestchargino mass, which the
\l*\.
non-appearance of gauginos in e+-e~ annihilationtellsus is greater than
about 60 GeV, and probably greater than m^. The search for neutralinos
in e+-e~ annihilation (with assumptions like (28.4.2))has set a lower
bound of 27 GeV on the mass of the lightestneutralino.29a


          28.6   Gauge   Mediation   of Supersymmetry    Breaking

In thissectionwe willconsider the possibilitythat the breakdown of super-
symmetry istransmitted to the known particlesthrough interactionsof the
ordinary SU(3) x SU(2) x 17(1)gauge bosons and their superpartners.30
It is assumed here that supersymmetry is dynamically broken in a
    of superfields,not including the superfieldsof the observed quarks
sector
and leptons, and that some of the chiral superfieldsin the symmetry-
breaking sector,known as the messenger superfields,have non-vanishing
SU(3) x SU(2) x 17(1) quantum numbers. In order for the messenger
particlesto be able to get large (say, of order 1 TeV) masses without
breaking SU(3) x SU(2) x 17(1),it is necessary for them to furnish a
real (or pseudoreal) representation of SU(3) x SU(2) x 1/(1),which
automaticallyalso means that they do not introduce any new anomalies.
Although most treatments of gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking in
the literaturealso make specificassumptions about the interactionsof the
messenger superfieldswith the other superfieldsresponsible for
       breaking, the most important predictions of thisclassof theoriesin
supersymmetry
fact do not depend on these assumptions. We shall therefore put off
assuminganything about the interactionsof the messenger superfieldswith
the other superfieldsof the symmetry-breaking sector.We will,however,
make another assumption about the S U(3) x S U(2) x U( 1)propertiesof the
           28.6 Gauge Mediation of Supersymmetry Breaking            221




Figure 28.5. A diagram of the sortthat introducesa breakdown of
      into the propagator of the gauge superfields.Here wavy linesare any
supersymmetry
component fieldsof the gauge superfields;solid linesare component fields
of the messenger superfields;and dotted linesare component fieldsof the
51/(3)x 51/(2)x l/(l)-neutral          of the supersymmetry-breakingsector.
                             superfields


messenger superfields,which has a strong phenomenological motivation.
In order for the messenger particlesnot to interferewith the unification
of couplings discussed in Section 28.2,we assume that they have the same
ratios for the total traces of all squared SU(3) x SU(2) x 17(1) gauge
generators as the ordinary quarks and leptons. This condition will
          be satisfiedifthe messenger superfields(together perhaps with
automatically
some SU(3) x SU(2) x [/(l)-neutralchiralsuperfields)furnish a complete
representationof some simple group G that contains SU(3)xSU(2) x 17(1),
of which the quarks and leptons (again, together perhaps with some
SU(3) x SU(2) x C/(l)-neutralchiral superfields)also form a complete
representation.(For instance, these left-chiralsuperfieldsmight form JV
SU(2) singletSU(3) tripletswith charge e/3 and N SU(2) doublet SU(3)
singletswith charges 0 and —e, which together form JV representations5
of SC/(5),together with an equal number of left-chiral  superfieldsin the
complex-conjugate representationsof S 17(3)x SU(2) x 17(1),which form
N representations5.) However, for our present purposes we willneither
need to assume that G is an actual symmetry group of the theory, nor
adopt any particularchoice of G or of the representations furnished by
the messenger particles.
  This interactionof the messenger superfieldsboth with the other chiral
and/or gauge superfieldsof the supersymmetry-breaking sector and with
the SU(3) x SU(2) x 17(1)gauge superfieldscan be expected to produce
a breakdown of supersymmetry in the propagators of the component
fieldsof the SU(3) x SU(2) x 17(1) gauge superfields.To lowest order
in the SU(3) x SU(2) x 17(1)couplings, the leading contribution to the
propagators comes from the diagram shown in Figure 28.5, in which a
pair of gauge, gaugino, or auxiliary D-field lines is attached to a loop
222                28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

of messenger fields,which also may have any number of interactions
with SU(3) x 517(2) x l/(l)-neutralfieldsof the supersymmetry-breaking
sector.The supersymmetry-breaking corrections Aic to the propagators of
the gauge superfields(with i = 1,2, 3 for SU(3), SU(2), and 17(1),and
c = V, A, D labellingthe differentcomponents of each gauge superfield)
thereforehave the forms

                    A3c(q) = (gt/16n2)Y,T3nTlcn(q),
                                        n
                    *2c(q) = (g2/16*2) £ T2nncn(q),                  (28.6.1)
                                        n
                    &ic(q) = (g'2/16n2)J2Tlnncn(q),
                                        n
where n labels the differentmessenger superfields;Hcn(q) are more-or-
lesscomplicated functions of the four-momentum     q; T3n and Tin are the
tracesof the squares of any generator of S 17(3)and SU(2), respectively,
                                                                       in
the representationsfurnished by the nth messenger superfield(normalized
so that in the defining representations T3 = T2 = 1/2); and T\n is the
sum of the squares of the electroweak hypercharges of the nth messenger
superfield.One immediate consequence isthat the gauginos acquire masses
of the same form:*

                       Wgiuino= (g52/16rc2)
                                          Y^ T3nMgn ,
                                           n
                        mwi„0 = (g2/l6n2) £ T2nMgn ,                  (28.6.2)
                                           n
                              =
                        mbino (g'2/l6n2)Y/Ti„Mgn,
                                           n
where the Mgn are masses that characterize the differentmessenger
          As already mentioned, in order to preserve the unificationof
superfields.
couplings at very high energy we assume that the sums of the Tn have the
same ratiosas for the observed quarks and leptons:

                   £       T3n = £ T2n = £ 37V5     = T .             (28.6.3)
                       n          n       n
  The breakdown of supersymmetry in these propagators is then
communicatedto the squarks and sleptons of the supersymmetric
      model through the diagrams shown in Figure 28.6, in which an
standard

* Recallthatthebino isthe             of the (7(1)gauge fieldB^ thatappearsin
                          superpartner
  theLagrangianof thestandardmodel.We arenot yettakingSU(2) x (7(1)breaking
  intoaccount,so the gaugino,squark,and sleptonmassescalculated hereshouldbe
  understoodas parametersappearingintheSU(3) x 5(7(2)x (7(l)-invarianteffective
  Lagrangianofthestandardmode.
                28.6 Gauge Mediation of Supersymmetry Breaking           223




Figure28.6. Diagrams thatcommunicate supersymmetry breakingto the squarks
and sleptons.Here dashed linesare squarks or sleptons;wavy linesare 51/(3)x
      x
51/(2) 1/(1)gauge bosons or auxiliaryD fields;solidlinesare quarks or leptons;
combined solidand wavy linesare 51/(3)x51/(2)x1/(1)gauginos;and the squares
                  of the supersymmetry-breakingpropagatorcorrectionshown
representinsertions
in Figure 28.5.


SU(3) x SU(2) x 17(1) gauge boson or gaugino or auxiliary D fieldis
emitted and reabsorbed by the squark or slepton.We are calculatingthe
effectivelow-energy theory in which SU(3) xSU(2) x C/(l)-breakingisnot
yet taken into account, so there is no mixing among the SU(3), SU(2),
and 17(1)propagators, and each propagator acts likea unit matrix on the
gauge indices.Thus the squared mass given to any squark or slepton will
be proportional to a sum over the squares of allthe SU(3) xSU(2) x U(l)
generators (includingcoupling constants) in the representation furnished
by that squark or slepton. The sums of the squared SU(2) and SU(3)
generators in the defining representationsare

                         = 3g2    1,
                                                          4gs2
           E(^/2)2           ■            £(gA/2)       =^'1>
           a=l                            a=l
where oa are the Pauli isospin matrices (5.4.18)and Xa are the Gell-Mann
matrices (19.7.2).For 17(1) the generator is just the weak hypercharge
(21.3.7),including a factor g'. The squared squark and slepton masses
thereforehave the forms
                                                      -■>'      '^2
                             Tin +  3/_g2_\2
M2=2^M;          3 \l6ii2)
          n

     =                           T3n +
A4       2£M;        3 \l6n2


M?=2£M;              4(jT        T3n +                               (28.6.4)
                     3 \^167i2
224               28 Supersymmetric Standard Models




where Q, U, D, L, and E are the scalar superpartners of the left-handed
quark doublets, the left-handed antiquarks of charge —2e/3 and +e/39 the
left-handed lepton doublets, and the left-handed charged antileptons,and
Msn are some new masses that characterizethe nth messenger superfields.
(The factor 2 is extracted from M]n for future convenience.) The squark
and slepton masses that are produced in this way are automatically the
same in all three generations, thus avoiding the problem with flavor-
changing processes discussed in Section 28.4.
  We expect allMgn and Msn to be roughly of the same order of
      so that the gluino and squarks willhave comparable masses, while
magnitude,
the wino, bino, and sleptons willbe much lighter,with masses suppressed
by squares of electroweak coupling constants.
  We can go considerably furtherthan thiswith some reasonable
    assumptions. Suppose that the effectsof supersymmetry breaking on
dynamical
the messenger superfieldsmay be modeled by including these superfields
along with a setof S 17(3)x SU(2) x [/(l)-neutralchiralsuperfieldsSn (not
necessarilyalldistinct)in a superpotential
                      /(0,0,S) = £^S„OA,                         (28.6.5)
                                  n
where On and <bnare left-chiralmessenger superfieldsin complex-conjugate
representations  of SU(3)  x SU(2) x 17(1) and Xn are a set of coupling
coefficients.(Here and below we suppress the S 17(3)x_S 17(2)indicesthat
are summed over in calculatingscalarproducts likeOnOn.) The superfields
Sn are supposed to have non-vanishing vacuum expectation values £fn and
3Fn for theirscalar and auxiliarycomponents, respectively.It is the
     values of J% that in these models introduce supersymmetry breaking
nonzero
in the masses of the Q>n and <tn particles.Section 26.4 shows that, with
gauge couplings neglected,the squared masses of the spinor components
of Q>n (and <bn)are the eigenvalues of the matrix Jt\Jtn, with Jtn defined
by Eq. (26.4.11),which gives
                              /   0    Xn<?n \


so that the messenger fermions have masses \knSfn\. To find the mass
terms for the scalar components <j>nand $n of the Q>n and <tn superfields,
we note that integratingout the auxiliaryfieldsof the d>n and On yields a
             28.6 Gauge Mediation of Supersymmetry Breaking              225

potential

        df(<l>,i>,sr)        df(<l>,4>,sr)=
   £                 +£                                     +
           d<t>n                d<f>n       ^|/ln^n|2[|</>n|2 |^|2],

to which we now must add the contribution of the auxiliarycomponent
of the Sn, given by the second term of Eq. (26.4.4)as:


                     An<Sn               =
            2Re£                              2Re^[j%A„<^„

The complex scalar fieldsof definitemass are then (<j>n  ±e~m,1(j)n)/<>j2,
where <xnis the phase of Xn^n9 with squared masses \^n^n\2 + \K^nV
(Note that this pattern,of a pair of complex scalarswith squared masses
equidistant above and below a Majorana fermion squared mass, is just
what we would expect from the sum rule (27.5.11).)Since these squared
masses must be positive,itfollows that

                             Wn\<\KWn\                                (28.6.6)
  The gaugino masses in models based on Eq. (28.6.5)are given by
diagrams of the form shown in Figure 28.5, but now with just a single
loop, not including what are shown as dotted lines in Figure 28.5. A
detailedcalculationgives the coefficientsMgn in Eq. (28.6.2)as31

                            =                 \*n\  \
                        Mqn
                         *gn TT^T g                    '              (28.6.7)
                              i^rvw          ln\\^n\2)
where

                             + x)ln(l + x) + (1 - x) ln(l - x)
              «w-23?[a2x2
                   = 1 + %l + x^ + x*_+                               (28.6.8)
                          6   15   28
The masses of the squarks and sleptons are given by the diagrams of Figure
28.6,which now involve just two loops. Another detailedcalculationgives
the mass parameters M2„ in Eq. (28.6.4)as31

                                        IJM    \
                        Msn = \£jlf (
                        M2                                            (28.6.9)
                              \yl\]\\xn\\<?n?)
where

                                                                 + x —> — x
 W-l+i[h(l+x)-2U2(I^)+iu2(I|j)
               1    » 4      319
           -\ x 2
      = ,1 j.          x          xb +                              (28.6.10)
              36   450      11760
226                       28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

with Li2 the dilogarithm

                                                   ln(l-1)
                              Li2(x) = - f                       dt.   (28.6.11)
                                         Jo
In particular,if (as is usually assumed) the various Sn are all the same,
and if \&\ < \Xn\\#>\2 for all n, then / and g in Eqs. (28.6.9)and (28.6.7)
may  be set equal to 1, so that
                                   = Msn = \9\l\Sf\ = M .              (28.6.12)
                             Mgn
Using Eq. (28.6.3),we can express the gaugino masses (28.6.2)as

                             mwino = (g2/l6n2)TM,
                             mbi„o = (5/3)(g'2/l6n2)TM,                (28.6.13)
                                    =
                             mgiuino (g2/16n2)TM,
while the squared squark and slepton masses (28.6.4)become


            = 2TM2                                r
      Ml                                                     +
                                             4 \ 16jt2


            = 2TM2
      Mfj                                    3 \3J        \l6it2)

            = 2TM1                       +                             (28.6.14)
      M%                                     3 V     3J    [lto?)


      Mi = 2TM2                              5-(i)2(jH-\'
                                             3 \2J \l6n2)


            =                        ■
      M*
                2™21{&)
There is no special reason to expect that \^\ <C |An^|2, but this
assumption
     is not actuallyvery restrictive,
                                    because Eq. (28.6.6)already requires
that |J^|< \An\\£f\2,and itturns out that the functions f(x) and g(x) do
not differmuch from unity for x < 1 unless x is very close to 1.
  The extreme simplicityof the results(28.6.13)and (28.6.14)has been
explained by Giudice and Rattazzi32 by using Seiberg's arguments of
holomorphy,33 described in Section 27.6. Suppose we introduce a super-
potential for the messenger superfields like (28.6.5),but with a single
external singletsuperfieldS:

                               /(S,») = S^iB«A.                        (28.6.15)
            28.6 Gauge Mediation of Supersymmetry Breaking                  227

Among other effectsthe kinematic term for the gauge superfieldVt (with
i = 3, 2, 1 for SC/(3), SU(2\ and 1/(1))in the Wilsonian effectiveLa-
grangian at a renormalization scale \iwillnow take the form

                —
        ^gauge,/* KG     ^M(S,//)^(^La^^L/?)                            (28.6.16)


with some functions Ni(S,ii)replacing the factors l/2gf(n) in Eq. (27.3.22).
(The 0-term isdropped here because ithas no effectin perturbation theory.
A sum is implied over indices on Wn^ that label differentmembers of
the adjoint representationsof S 17(3) and S 17(2),which are not explicitly
shown.) The gauge coupling constant isnow given by settingthe superfield
S equal to the expectation value £f of itsscalar component
                                1
                                    = Ni(Sr,ii).                    (28.6.17)
                             2gf(li)
Also, recallingthat Wn^ = A,x<x+ 0(0) and using Eq. (27.2.11),the terms
in the Lagrangian density (28.6.16)of second order in the gaugino fields
are,up to derivativeterms,

         -2j>e                             +                        .
                     [Ni(^fi)(liR ^iR)         [Ni(S9fi)]^{X[LeXiL)]

This gives the gaugino masses

                       [Ni(S,n)]&
          mgi(ji)=                  =
                                        gf(n)\[Ni(s,n)y             (28.6.18)

Now letus consider the behavior of iV,(y,fi)as a function of a realpositive
Sf, with the phases of the messenger superfieldsadjusted so that all X„
are real and positive.Suppose we fix the values of the gauge couplings
     at some scalen = K above allthe messenger particlemasses. Taking
gi(fi)
account of the change in the constants bt in the renormalization group
equations ndgj(n)/dn = btgf as (i passes through the various messenger
masses, the solution of this equation when \i is below all the messenger
particlemasses takes the form
  1        1
g{(»)    gHK)~2b'    rH^)--H^)--^HwN
where we label the messenger particlesso that their masses Mn = Xn^
satisfy
                       M\ > M2 > ••• > MN ,
       ' is calculated
     kin)
and b\                 taking account only of particleswith masses less
than Mn. Since allMn are proportional to 5^, we see that JV,-(«^,
                                                               fi)has the
228                  28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

if dependence

      N,(Sf,n) = -b™ssen*er \nSf + ^-independent           terms ,   (28.6.19)
               = bf] - b\N) isthe contribution to bt of allthe messenger
where fe!nessen8er
superfields.According to Eq. (27.9.45)(with CiX = 0 and c{2 = Cf2 =
£„ T^), thisis

                                    =
                           ^messenger             ^                  (28.6.20)
                                        _^_   £

Since Ni(S,fi)is required by supersymmetry        to be a holomorphic function
of S, we see that

      Mii(S,n)= -tt~2 Yl TinlnS + S-independent terms .              (28.6.21)
                  16ti2 n

Expanding around S = 5^, to firstorder in 3F we have [In^\^           = 2F'1^
and so Eq. (28.6.18)gives the gaugino masses


                                                                     (28.6.22)
                          **»-$£?:*>               9*

Using Eq. (28.6.3),we see that this is the same as our previous result
(28.6.13).Eq. (28.6.14)for the squark and slepton masses was obtained by
Giudice and Rattazzi in a similar way, by studying the kinematic terms
for the quark and lepton superfieldsinstead of the gauge superfields.
  Incidentally,Eqs. (28.6.13)and (28.6.14)could be obtained (in general
with differentvalues of M in Eq. (28.6.13)and Eq. (28.6.14))without a
specificdynamical assumption like Eq. (28.6.5),if we supposed that the
supersymmetry-breaking sector respected invariance under some grand
unified group G that had both the known quarks and leptons and the
messenger fieldsas complete representations.In thiscase the coefficients
Mgn and Msn in Eqs. (28.6.2)and (28.6.4)would have values Mg(d) and
Ms(d\ respectively,that depend only on the irreduciblerepresentation d
of G to which the nth messenger fieldsbelong. The sums of Tin over n
belonging to any irreduciblerepresentation d of G have the same ratios
as the sums in Eq. (28.6.3),so J2ned Tin = kiT(d)9 where k^ = /c2= 1,
k\ = 5/3, and therefore
                               =                      =
                 ]T TinMgn         ]T Mg(d) ]T Tin        ktMg ,
                  »                 d       ned
where Mg = £d Mg(d)T(d). Likewise

                 £       TinMi = ]TM2s(d)]T Tin = kiM2s ,
                     n            d       ned
            28.6 Gauge Mediation of Supersymmetry Breaking            229

where M2 = £<,M52(d)W         Eqs. (28.6.2)and (28.6.4)would then yield
Eqs. (28.6.13) and (28.6.14),except with Mg in place of TM and M2 in
place of 2TM2. But the assumption that Mgn and Msn respect invariance
under G is implausible ifthe messenger mass scaleis far below the grand
unified scale, since whatever we assume about a grand unified gauge
group, the SU(3) x SU(2) x 17(1)gauge interactionswould make coupling
constants likeXn run differentlyfor Q>n with differentSU(3) xSU(2) x 17(1)
quantum numbers in the same representation of the grand unified group.
  These resultsare subject to various radiativecorrections,of which the
most important isthat we must use values of g5,g, and g' renormalized at
a scalecomparable to the mass being calculated.Indeed, the gaugino mass
ratios given in Eq. (28.6.13)could also be derived under quite different
assumptions: that all gaugino masses are equal at the grand unification
scale where the coupling constants are related by g2 = g2 = 5g/2/3 and
become differentat lower energies as described by the renormalization
group equations.
   For an illustrativeexample of numerical results,suppose that the
        superfieldsform an SU(2) singletSU(3) tripletwith charge e/3
messenger
and an SU(2) doublet SU(3) singlet with charges 0 and —e9 together
with left-chiralsuperfieldsin the complex-conjugate representations of
SU(3) x S 17(2)x 17(1).Then, as already mentioned, Eq. (28.6.3)issatisfied
with T = 2 x 1/2 = 1, so by using the correct values of the gauge
       the masses of the squarks, gluino, L sleptons,wino, E sleptons,and
couplings,
bino are calculated to be in the ratios3411.6 ::7.0 ::2.5 ::2 ::1.1 ::1.0.
In larger representations of G we could have T > 1, in which case the
gluino would be the heaviestof these particles,and the sleptons the lightest
ones.
   There are also radiativecorrectionsaside from the running of the gauge
couplings. According to one calculation,34in the model with an SU(2)
singletSU(3) tripletwith charge e/3 and an SU(2) doublet SU(3) singlet
with charges 0 and —e, together with left-chiralsuperfieldsin the complex-
conjugate representationsof S 17(3)x SU(2) x 17(1),radiativecorrections
give the ratiosof the masses of the squarks, gluino, L sleptons,wino, E
sleptons,and bino as 9.3 ::6.4 ::2.6 ::1.9 ::1.35 ::1.0.
   As we saw in the previous section,the wino and bino may mix with
the charged and neutral higgsinos, so the wino and bino masses that
have been calculated here must be regarded as inputs to a calculationof
physical masses of mixtures known as charginos and neutralinos,rather
than physical masses themselves.
   Now we shallconsider the masses of the Higgs scalarsin these models.
If we were to consider only the two-loop diagrams by which these scalars
get masses through gauge interactionswith the supersymmetry-breaking
sector,then since (apart from signs)they have the same SU(3) x SU(2) x
230                     28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

(7(1)quantum numbers as the left-handed lepton doublets, their masses
would be given by a formula likethe fourth of Eqs. (28.6.4)

 [m]h loop= [W2]2loop= Ml
                                                                                  n2
              =             3/V         t- +                                T|"        (28.6.23)
                  £m        4 ^16tt2
                                                   |])2(i&)
If this were the whole story, then it would be impossible to meet the
condition for 517(2) x [/(l)breaking found in the previous section that
(unless tan/? is very close to unity) one of m\ + |//|2and m\ + |//|2
                                                                    must
be negative. Fortunately, the large masses of the top quark and squark
produce a negative contribution to m\ that leads naturally to a
       breakdown of electroweak symmetry. The couplings of the Higgs
spontaneous
doublets to the third-generation quark superfieldsare described by the
superpotential

                       /3rdgen = h (HjeQ)       B + Xt
                                                           (ifJ*g)
                                                                      f ,              (28.6.24)

where Q is the SU(2) quark doublet left-chiral  superfield(T,B), while t
and B are the left-chiralsuperfieldsof the left-handed top and bottom
antiquarks, and Xt and fa are the Yukawa couplings, relatedto the t and
b quark masses by mt = fav2 and mt = fav\. The lastterm of Eq. (26.4.7)
then gives the terms in the potentialinvolving an interactionbetween the
squark fieldsand Higgs fieldsas
                                Q3-
        VsqH = A|jJtj zfi~r fa&i j*J        +
                                                       2
                                                + U,              -                    (28.6.25)
                       Xb\ bf^-Jff^                        je\@       je\2r

where scriptlettersdenote the scalarfieldcomponents of superfields.The
squark loop contributions to the potential of tf\ and ^f 2 are then
      ■rsquark
             loop=
                   3(5?5?*)    [2\h\2{^\^i)            +2\Xt\2^l^2)]               ,   (28.6.26)

where (SfSf*) is the vacuum expectation value of the product of any
one of the squark fieldsand itscomplex conjugate at the same spacetime
point. (In taking this to be the same for all squark types, we are here
using Eq. (28.6.4),which tellsus that the squark masses Mq do not vary
much among &~9 ^, &~9 and & squarks. The factor 3 in Eq. (28.6.26)takes
account of the three colors of each squark type.)The vacuum expectation
value (SfSf*) is given in lowest order by

                  = (sr(x)sr*(x))vAC                   d4p
        (W)                                                                   '        (28.6.27)
                                                 J   +
                                            (2tt)4 p2 M%-               ie
               28.6 Gauge Mediation of Supersymmetry Breaking               231

This of course is divergent, but the contribution to supersymmetry-
breaking coefficientswould be cancelled by quark loops if the squarks
had the zero bare mass of the quarks, so the effectof quark loops is to
subtract from (28.6.27)the same expression with Mq replaced with zero,
which with a Wick rotation becomes


                       Mi               *e
         Kw)      '-         /
                       (2n)4J (p2 + Af2_fe)(p2_fe)


                        (2tt)4IJo   p2 + M2QC

We have insertedan ultravioletcut-offat the messenger mass M, because
at momenta above M the squark mass must be replaced with a momentum-
dependent mass, which goes to the supersymmetric value zero at very high
momenta. Making thissubstitutionin Eq. (28.6.26)gives a net contribution
to the potentialdue to squark and quark loops:



    w°°p.3M"                                           +
                                     2\Xb\2(tf\tfx)        2\Xt\2(tf\tf2)
                                                                  (28.6.28)
(This isa three-loop contribution, because  the squared squark  masses   are
given by two-loop diagrams.  There  are also terms in the potential that are
          in
quadratic both the Higgs and squark superfields,arisingfrom products
of the Higgs and squark terms in the squares of the 517(2) x 17(1)gauge
fieldD-components. These do not make a three-loop contribution to the
Higgs masses because the sum of each SU(2) x 17(1)quantum number of
the squarks vanishes,so that theircontributions to the SU(2) x 17(1)gauge
fieldD-components have zero vacuum expectation value.)Comparing Eq.
(28.6.28)with Eq. (28.5.9)and adding the two-loop contribution (28.6.23)
to the masses, we see then that


                        ,     ,     3MhXb\2     (M2\




                        ,     ,     3Ml\Xt\2    (M2\



Using Eq. (28.6.14)and \kt\= mt/v2 = mt(2y/2GF)1/2/sinp, we may write
232                  28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

(28.6.30)as

                   ~ 2TM2
              m\

                                    gs2     In                    (28.6.31)
                       n2sm2p    I 16??           8T(g|/16 *2))
For T = 1,gs2/47t= 0.118,g2/4rc = 0.0340, g'2/4jr= 0.0101, and mt = 180
GeV, thisis
                                             3.06
                            m2; ^ m£   1-                         (28.6.32)
                                             sin20
which is negative for allvalues of ft,thus providing a natural mechanism
for the spontaneous breaking of the electroweak gauge symmetry. Also,
M2L = (0.91 x 10_4)M2/87c2. Unless tan/3 is huge, we have \Xb\< |A»|,so
Eq. (28.6.27)gives
                                       ~
                                  m\       M£ .                   (28.6.33)
  The aspect of electroweak phenomenology for which the predictions of
gauge-mediated supersymmetry models are most uncertain and
        has to do with the parameter \i in the supersymmetry-preserving
unsatisfactory
term fi[(HjeH2)]^ and the related supersymmetry-breaking term Bfi in
the Lagrangian density. These are related because the interactionsof
the Higgs superfieldswith the gauge, lepton, and quark superfieldsare
invariant under a symmetry

                      HX -+ e'<»tf!
                                  ,         H2 -► e^H2 ,
                      Q -+ e-"0Q,           Vi^Vt,                (28.6.34)
                      D^D,                  U -► 1/,

which in the absence of a superpotential term fi(HjeH2) would forbid
radiativecorrectionsfrom producing a term BiiRe(3tf?]eJtf?2)   in the scalar
fieldpotential.
  It is not possible for Bfi to vanish because then Eq. (28.5.22)and the
factthat (as we have seen) rriA=^ 0 would imply that sin2/? = 0, or in other
words eitherv\ = 0 or V2 = 0, which would imply that eitherallthe charge
—e/3 quarks and charged leptons are massless or all the charge +2e/3
quarks are massless. (IfBfi = 0 and \i= 0 then thisproblem persiststo all
orders,because the appearance of non-zero vacuum expectation values for
both v\ and V2 would imply that symmetry under any combination of the
transformation (28.6.34)and electroweak 17(1)gauge transformations is
spontaneously broken, so the C-odd neutral scalarwould be a Goldstone
boson with yyia= 0.) It is natural to try to account for a non-zero value
           28.6 Gauge Mediation of Supersymmetry Breaking           233

of Bfi as a radiativecorrection in a theory in which symmetry under the
transformation (28.6.34)is explicitlybroken by a supersymmetric term
ti[(HjeH2)]& in the Lagrangian density. This gives a very small value
of B/i at the messenger scale,34although renormalization group effects
greatly increase B/J,at lower energies. According to Eq. (28.5.22),a
relativelysmall Bfi would fitwell with the idea that the large mass of
the top quark arisesfrom a large value of tan /?.In any case, as already
mentioned, the experimental lower bound on the chargino mass tellsus
that \n\isat leastabout 60 GeV.
  The trouble is that the appearance of a non-zero value of \i resurrects
the hierarchy problem that supersymmetry was supposed to solve:instead
of asking why the Higgs mass terms in the Lagrangian density are so
much smaller than the Planck mass or the mass at which gauge couplings
are unified,we now have to ask why \iisthissmall?
  The hierarchy problem would be put to rest if the Higgs superfields
interactwith the supersymmetry-breaking sector in such a way that a
term ^[(Hjefy)]^ isforbidden by some symmetry, but appears when that
symmetry is spontaneously broken. A massless Goldstone boson may be
avoided ifthe symmetry is discreterather than continuous. The simplest
possibilityis simply to extend the symmetry transformation (28.6.34)to
include a transformation
                             S _► e~2i(pS,
which would allow a term in the superpotential of the form


We can avoid a continuous symmetry by also including a term S3 in the
superpotential,so that the Lagrangian isinvariant only under
          cp 2lmultiple of 27r/3,which isstill
transformations
     with                                    enough to forbid a non-zero
bare value of \i.In thiscase the appearance of non-zero vacuum values
9* and J* for the scalarand auxiliarycomponents of S yields

                     B\i = \X&\ ,      \i= \X&\ .
This would resultin B having a very large \A'\-independent value M, given
                                                              ~
by (28.6.12),which is greater by a factor of order (g%/16n)~~l 100 than
the squark or gluino masses. But then, since Eqs. (28.6.32)and (28.6.33)
give m\ + m\ < 0, the stabilitycondition (28.5.11)would require that
\p\> M/2, and hence Eq. (28.5.22)would require that m^ is also much
greater than the squark and slepton masses. This is ruled out by the
relation(28.5.23)and the estimates (28.6.33)and (28.6.32)of m\ and m\
unless tan P is very close to unity.
  We will see in Section 31.6 that theories of gravity-mediated super-
symmetry breaking naturally yield acceptable values of Bfi and \i.Such
234               28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

theoriesare characterized by a very high energy scale of supersymmetry
breaking, in various versions of order either1011 GeV or 1013 GeV. There
have been several suggestions35 on ways to obtain acceptable values of
Bfi and \iin theoriesin which supersymmetry is broken at relativelylow
energy, such as theoriesof gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking, but
none of them is particularlycompelling. Also, since we do not know
where \i comes from, we do not have any reason to suppose that it is
real,so theoriesof gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking are at riskof
yielding too much CP violation,just as in the more general framework of
Section 28.4.
  Like the scalar squared masses m\ and m\, the parameters Ay and
Qj in Eq. (28.4.1)are given by two-loop diagrams. However, they have
the dimensions of mass rather than mass squared, and they are much less
than the scalarand gaugino masses, so they make a relativelyunimportant
contribution to supersymmetry breaking.
  As in any model with supersymmetry broken at energies much less
than 1010 GeV, the lightestR-odd particlein allmodels based on gauge-
mediated supersymmetry breaking is the gravitino. As we will see in
Section 31.3, the gravitino mass is of the order of y/G times the squared
energy F characteristicof supersymmetry breaking, defined so that the
vacuum energy is F2/2. Where supersymmetry is broken by the ^r-
terms J^o of the SU(3) x SU(2) x C/(l)-neutralchiral superfieldsSw, we
have F2 = ^2n \^no\2. If there are no large dimensionless quantities in
the Lagrangian for the Sn, then squark masses in this model are of the
order of g2jF/l6n2 « lO"2^, so in order for this to be lessthan the
naturalness bound of 104 GeV, we must have y/F < 106 GeV, which gives
a gravitino mass lessthan 1 keV Gravitational couplings are so weak at
accessibleenergies that itis only the helicity+1/2 statesof the gravitino
that can actuallybe produced, and these behave just likegoldstino states.
As shown by Eq. (27.5.12),in the models discussed here the goldstino
fieldappears with coefficientiyJ23Fn in the fermionic component xpn of
Sn. Goldstinos are emitted in the decay of the R-odd sparticlesinto the
corresponding R-even particlesof the standard model through radiative
corrections,with goldstinos emerging from vertices connecting internal
xpn and Sfn lines. According to Eq. (29.2.10),the goldstino emission
amplitudes are inversely proportional to F, which makes these decays
comparatively slow, although perhaps fast enough to be observed.
  Because the decay of R-odd particles into goldstinos is slow, it is
phenomenologically important in these models to identify the next-to-
lightestR-odd particle,intowhich allthe heavier R-odd particleswilldecay
before it in turn decays into a goldstino. As we have seen, the next-to-
lightestR-odd particleis usually a slepton,wino, or bino. (Itis possible in
models with a messenger superfieldhaving the same SU(3) xSU(2) x 17(1)
               28.7 Baryon and Lepton Non-Conservation               235

quantum numbers as the Higgs doublets that the mixing between these
superfieldswould lower the mass of the doublet messengers so much that
the lightestK-odd particlewould be the gluino.35")Detailed calculations
including the effectsof S 17(2)x 17(1)breaking indicatethat here isa large
region of parameter space in which the next-to-lightest K-odd particleis
one of the two tau sleptons.35^



            28.7   Baryon   and Lepton Non-Conservation

The extra particlesin supersymmetric models provide several new
        for baryon and lepton non-conservation. We saw in Section 28.1
mechanisms
that there are various baryon- and lepton-number non-conserving super-
symmetric operators (28.1.2)and (28.1.3)of dimensionality four that can
be included in a renormalizable SU(3) x SU(2) x C/(l)-invarianttheory
and that would lead to processes like proton decay at a catastrophic
rate. These terms can be excluded from the Lagrangian by imposing
R parity conservation (or, equivalently, invariance under a change of
sign of allquark and lepton chiral superfields)but thisdoes not exclude
various SU(3) x SU(2) x C/(l)-invariantbut baryon- and lepton-number
non-conserving operators of dimensionality d > 4. As discussed in
      21.3, if there is an underlying mechanism for baryon and lepton
Section
non-conservation characterized by some high mass scale M, then these
operators will appear in the effectiveLagrangian of the standard model
with coefficientsproportional to M4~d. With only the fieldsof the non-
supersymmetric standard model, operators that can violate baryon
           have a minimum
conservation                  dimensionality six,36and thus give baryon
non-conserving amplitudes proportional to M~2. The new fieldsrequired
by supersymmetry lead to two important changes in estimates of baryon
non-conserving processes like proton and bound neutron decay. As we
saw in Section 28.2, the change in the renormalization group equations
gives larger estimates of M, which decreases the effectof the dimension
six operators.At the same time, these new fieldsallow the construction of
new operators of dimensionality five,which give baryon non-conserving
amplitudes proportional to M_1 and are therefore likely to make the
dominant contribution to proton and bound neutron decay.37
  The supersymmetric operators of dimensionality fivethat can be formed
out of chiral superfields(genericallycalled O) are of the forms (0*00)o
and (OOOO)^,      and their complex conjugates. (We do not consider
operators  that  include derivativesor gauge fields,because they do not
offerany additional possibilityof baryon or lepton non-conservation.) In
the notation of Section 28.1,the SU(3) xSU(2) x C/(l)-invariantoperators
236               28 Supersymmetric Standard Models




                         ><



Figure 28.7. A diagram that can produce a four-fermioninteractionamong
quarks and/or leptons that violatesbaryon and lepton number conservation.
Here solidlinesare quarks and/or leptons;dashed linesare squarks and/or
sleptons;the combined solidand wavy lineisa gaugino; and the dot isa vertex
arisingdirectlyfrom the J^-term interactions
                                           (28.7.3).


of dimensionality fivethat also conserve R parity are

                                 (LLH2H2y,                         (28.7.1)

  (LEHi)D,    (QDHfo,         (QUHi)D9   (QQUD)^,       (QULE)*,   (28.7.2)
and

                        (QQQL)^,         (UUDE)f    ,              (28.7.3)
with obvious contraction of indicesas dictated by SU(3) and 517(2)
            The interaction (28.7.1)is the supersymmetric version of the
conservation.
dimensionality five operator which would provide small neutrino masses
in some theories.38The interactions(28.7.2)only provide small corrections
to processes that already occur in the renormalizable terms of the super-
symmetric standard model. It isthe interactions(28.7.3)that provide new
mechanisms for baryon as well as lepton non-conservation.
  According to Eq. (26.4.4),the quarks and leptons enter in the
         (28.7.3)through terms involving a pair of quark and/or lepton
interactions
fieldsand a pair of squark and/or slepton fields. In order to
generate
     reactions among quarks and leptons alone, it is necessary for the
pair of squarks and/or sleptons to be converted into a pair of quarks
and/or leptons by exchanging a gaugino in the one-loop diagram shown
in Figure 28.7. This will produce effectivefour-fermion qqqt
       with d = 6 among three quarks and a lepton. The coupling g6
interactions
of these interactionswill be proportional to the square of the gauge
coupling g or g' or gs of the gaugino, to the supersymmetry-breaking
mass of the gaugino, to the inverse square of the larger of the gaugino
and squark or slepton masses (which is needed to give a coupling of
the right dimensionality),and to a factor of order 1/87T2 from the loop
integration.
               28.7 Baryon and Lepton Non-Conservation               237

  It might be thought that the greater strength of the gluino coupling
would make gluino exchange the dominant contribution to g^. (Indeed, in
gauge-mediated supersymmetry-breaking theories,for moderate values of
the trace (28.6.3)and with g « g',Eqs. (28.6.13)-(28.6.14)
                                                         give

                   Wgluino« msquark« T^~2M*    >

                                               g2
                   mwino « mslepton« ^bino «       ^* >
                                              T^
where M* is a mass characterizing the messenger sector. Therefore in
such theories individual gluino exchange diagrams give contributions
proportional to g^/mg\uino,while wino or bino exchange (or, more
       chargino or neutralino exchange) makes a contribution
precisely,
       to g2mwino/m^quark,which is smaller by a factor roughly equal to
proportional
WwinogV^giuinogs « g4/gs-) However, there is a cancellation among the
diagrams for gluino exchange that strongly suppresses theircontribution.
This was originally shown using a Fierz identity among four-fermion
operators,39but the same resultcan be obtained with no equations at
all. To conserve color, the coefficientsof the operators (QQQL)^       and
(UUDE)^     must be totallyantisymmetric  in the colors of the three quark
or antiquark superfields,and sincethese superfieldsare bosonic, they must
then also be antisymmetric in their flavors as well. Gluino interactions
are flavor-independent,so ifwe can neglect the flavor dependence of the
squark masses then the coefficientsof the four-fermion d = 6 operators
willalso be totallyantisymmetric in flavor as well as color. Fermi
statistics
     then requires the coefficientsof these operators to be also totally
antisymmetric in the spin indices of the quark or antiquark fields.But
the three quark or antiquark fieldsin the d = 6 operators derived by
gaugino exchange from QQQLp        or (UUDE)^     are all left-handed and
thereforehave only two independent spin indices,so no coefficientcan be
antisymmetric in allthree spins. The contribution of gluino exchange to
the d = 6 operators would thereforevanish ifthe squark masses were all
equal and so thiscontribution is suppressed by the fractionaldifferences
among the masses of the differentsquarks. According to Eq. (28.6.4),in
theoriesof gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking the fractional
      between the U and D squark masses are of order g'4/g*, so gluino
differences
exchange between the antisquarks in the (UUDE)^      operator generates a
dimension sixfour-fermion operator with a coefficientof the same order as
that generated by bino exchange. However, since gluinos conserve flavor
this operator likethe (UUDE)$> operator must be totallyantisymmetric
in antiquark flavors,so that it must involve c or t quarks and therefore
cannot contribute directlyto proton or bound neutron decay. On the other
hand, Eq. (28.6.4)indicatesthat the fractionalmass differencesamong the
238               28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

Q quarks of differentflavors is much less than of order g4/g*, so that
gluino exchange between the squarks in the (QQQL)^      operator makes
a contribution to gs that is much smaller than wino or bino exchange.
We conclude that at least in the theories of gauge-mediated supersym-
metry breaking, gluino exchange makes a smaller contribution to proton
or bound neutron decay than wino or bino exchange. In other models
gluino exchange may make a contribution comparable to that of other
processes.40
  For g « g' and mwino « Wbino,the contribution of wino or bino exchange
to the dimension six operators isof order
                                   2
                             S6 « a 2 2      >                    (28.7.4)
                                  ^Xquark
where g$ is a typicalvalue of the couplings of the effectived = 5
      (28.7.3).If the wino and squark masses have the same ratio {g2/g])
interactions
as in theoriesof gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking, then this gives


                                57rzgjmSquark
  The four-fermion qqqt-tevms of dimensionality six in the effectiveLa-
grangian are the same as those that had been supposed to generate
processes like proton decay in non-supersymmetric theories.36They
     proton and bound neutron decay at a rate which on dimensional
produce
grounds must be of the form
                            rN = cNm5Ng26,                       (28.7.6)
where cn is a pure number that must be calculated by non-perturbative
calculationsin quantum chromodynamics. Much work has gone into these
calculations,with results41generally in the range cjv*3x    10~3±a7.
  To estimate gs, we note that itis not possible to produce ^-terms like
(28.7.3)that involve only left-chiral
                                    superfieldsby the tree-approximation
exchange of gauge supermultiplets,which always interactwith both left-
chiral superfields and their right-chiralcomplex conjugates. Thus the
interactions (28.7.3)arise in the tree approximation only from the
exchangeof particlesof chiral superfields,and therefore gs is of the order
of gj/M\, where gj is a typicalbaryon and lepton non-conserving
      of some superheavy left-chiral
coupling                             superfieldof mass Mj to the quark
and lepton superfields.To produce the interactions(28.7.3),these
       particlesmust be color tripletsor antitriplets,
superheavy                                             and SU(2) triplets
or singlets. Whatever gauge group unifiesthe strong and electroweak
interactionspresumably dictatessome relationbetween the interactionsof
the superheavy color tripletT and the familiarcolor singletH\ and H2.
Then gj willbe of the same order as the Yukawa coupling constants in
                28.7 Baryon and Lepton Non-Conservation                  239

the interactions(28.1.2)and (28.1.3)that give mass to the known quarks
and leptons, and which are equal to quark or lepton masses divided by
the vacuum expectation values of order GJ1/2 ~ 300 GeV of 3tf\ or 2tf\.
We thereforetake
                                      GFm2f
                                                                    (28'7'7)
                               B-V-
where m/ is some typical quark or lepton mass. We have seen that
the dimension five operators are antisymmetric in quark flavors,so as a
compromise between the masses of the 5 quark and the u or d quarks,
we will take      = 30 MeV. Combining Eqs. (28.7.5)-(28.7.7)   and taking
              mj
MT = 2 x lO1^ GeV (as suggested by the resultsof Section 28.2),cN =
0.003,g]/An = 0.118,g2/4n = 1/(0.23x 137),and msqUark= 1 TeV, we find
a proton (or bound neutron) lifetimeT^1 of about 2 x 1031 years.42This is
not very differentfrom experimental lower bounds on the partiallifetimes
of what are expected to be the leading modes of proton decay, variously
quoted as ranging from 1031 to 5 x 1032 years. At the time of writing
the most stringentbounds are set by the non-observation of proton decay
in the large Super Kamiokande neutrino detector in Japan :42athe partial
lifetimesfor the decays p —► e+n° and p —► vK+ are greater than 2.1x 1033
years and 5.5x 1032 years,respectively.There isan uncertainty of a factor
of at least 100 in the above estimate of the theoreticallifetimefrom the
uncertainty in the squark mass alone, so itis too soon to say that there
is any discrepancy between experiment and theoreticalexpectations. On
the other hand, supersymmetry raises the possibilitythat baryon non-
conservation may be discovered soon.
  We can also say a littleon general grounds about the expected branching
ratiosfor various proton and bound neutron decay modes. As we have
mentioned, the dimension five operators (28.7.3)must be totally
            in the flavor of the quark superfields,so the only operators
antisymmetric
that concern us here are of the forms (UiDjDkNt)?, (DiUjUkE^)^, and
(DiUjUkEf)&, where i9j9k9fare generation indices,and in each case j ^ k.
The exchange of neutral winos or binos then produces d = 6 four-fermion
operators of the forms UidjdkVf,diUjUke;,and d(UjUke^9with j ^ k and i
and t arbitrary,while charged wino exchange produces the same four-
fermion operators with j ^ j and k and t arbitrary.The only quarks light
enough to be involved in proton decay are w, 5, and d; ignoring allthe
others and the small mixing angles in the third generation, we have

     u\ = u ,    d\ = d cos 6C + s sin6C,     di = —d sin6C + scos 6C,
where 6C is the Cabibbo angle, while W2, W3, and d$ can be ignored.
The four-fermion operators that can be produced by wino or bino
exchangeand can contribute to proton or bound neutron decay thus are
240               28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

udsvs cos(20c),uddvt sin(20c),uuses cos0c, and uudessinQc, plus
others
    with quarks and leptons replaced with antiquarks and antileptons.
All other things being equal, the dominant decay modes are therefore
p -► K+v, n -► K°v, p -► K°e+, and p -► K V> while the rates for the
decay modes p —► 7r+v,n —► 7r°v,p —► 7r°e+,p —► 7r°//+,and n —► 7r~e+ are
suppressed by factorssin26C = 0.05,though also enhanced somewhat by
the greater phase space available.
  These considerations do not lead to definitepredictions of branching
ratios,because in addition to allthe factors mentioned above, the
        genericallycalled g$ of the operators (28.7.3)may have a strong
coefficients
dependence on the superfield flavors appearing in these operators. To
go further,one needs a specifictheory for the generation of the
dimension
     five operators. Most of the authors of Reference 42 concluded on
the basis of a supersymmetric version of S U(5) theoriesthat proton and
bound neutron decay would be dominated by the processes p —► K+v
and n —► K°v, but for a model based on SO(10) charged lepton modes
can become prominent.43 Also, in some models higgsino exchange can
compete with wino and bino exchange,44 increasing the rate of p —> K+v.
It seems a good idea in searches for baryon non-conservation to keep an
open mind as to the decay modes to be expected in proton or bound
neutron decay.
  Of course, itispossiblethat allof these baryon non-conserving processes
are prohibited by some sort of conservation law. As mentioned in Section
28.1,stringtheory argues againstbaryon conservation being a fundamental
global continuous symmetry, but the baryon non-conserving operators
(28.7.3)may be forbidden by a ILi multiplicativesymmetry known as
baryon parity,45under which the Q superfield is neutral; the H2 and
D superfieldsare multiplied by the phase exp(m/3), and the L, H\, U,
and E superfieldsare multiplied by the opposite phase exp(—in/3). This
symmetry isdesigned to allow the fundamental Yukawa couplings (28.1.2)
and (28.1.3)as well as the //-term(28.5.7)and the lepton non-conserving
terms (28.1.4)and (28.7.1),but itrulesout the dimension four baryon non-
conserving  term  (28.1.5)and  the dimension five baryon non-conserving
terms (28.7.3).This symmetry is spontaneously broken by the appearance
of vacuum expectation values of jtf\ and J^\ (anc*perhaps the sneutrino
fieldsJf\ and with no conservation law for R parity, there would be
nothing to keep the lightestsupersymmetric particlestable.


                               Problems

  1. Suppose   that the interactions (28.1.4) and (28.1.5) were actually
      present in the Lagrangian of a supersymmetric version of the
                             References                            241

   standard model. Make a rough estimate of how heavy the squarks
   and sleptons would have to be to avoid a conflictwith experimental
   bounds on the proton lifetime.

2. Suppose that the typicalmass m of the gauginos, higgsinos,squarks
   and sleptons is very much larger than mz. Give the renormalization
   group equations for the running gauge couplings at energies both
   above and below m. Use the results,together with the unification
   assumption employed in Section 28.2,to give formulas for sin20 and
   the unificationscale M in terms of m, mz, e(mz)9 gs(mz\ and ns.
   How large could m be without violating experimental bounds on
   sin26 and M?

3. Give formulas for the couplings of the quarks and leptons to the
   lightestCP-even neutral scalar particlein the minimum supersym-
   metric standard model in terms of the parameters m^, mz, /?,Gp,
   and the quark and lepton masses.

4. Use holomorphy arguments to derive the one-loop formula for the
   gluino mass in a theory of gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking,
   in which the messenger superfields Q>n and <bn get their masses
   from a term Y^n ^w^n(OnOn) in the superpotential,in terms of the
   expectation values £fn and 3Fn of the (/)-
                                            and ^-components  of the
   singletsuperfieldsSn, in the limitwhere \^n\ < \Xn\\^n\2-
5. Taking account of the possibilityof a small flavordependence of squ-
   ark masses, estimate the gluino exchange contribution to baryon and
   lepton non-conserving four-fermion interactionsamong the quarks
   and leptons.Set an upper bound on these contributions,using the
   boundon squark mass splittingsfrom the rate of K° —>K conversion.


                            References

 1. We will not consider here the possibilityof unificationat much
    lower energies raised by I.Antoniadis, Phys. Lett.B246, 377 (1990);
    J. Lykken, Phys. Rev. D54, 3693 (1996),and revived by N. Arkani-
    Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, and G. Dvali,Phys. Lett.B429, 263 (1998);
    K. R. Dienes, E. Dudea, and T. Gherghetta, Phys. Lett. B436,
    55 (1998); I. Antoniadis, N. Arkani-Hamed, S. Dimopoulos, and
    G. Dvali, Phys. Rev. Lett. B436, 257 (1998).
la. S. Weinberg, in Proceedings of the XVII InternationalConference
    on High Energy Physics, London, 1974, J.R. Smith, ed. (Rutherford
    Laboratory, Chilton, Didcot, England, 1974); S. Weinberg, Phys.
242                  28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

      Rev. D13, 974 (1976); E. Gildener and S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev.
      D13, 3333 (1976).
  lb. T. Banks and L. Dixon, Nucl. Phys. B307, 93 (1988).For a detailed
      treatment, see J. Polchinski,String Theory (Cambridge University
      Press,Cambridge, 1998): Chapter 18.
      2. Additive ^-conservation laws were introduced by A. Salam and J.
         Strathdee, Nucl. Phys. B87, 85 (1975); P. Fayet, Nucl. Phys. B90,
         104 (1975),reprinted in Supersymmetry, S. Ferrara,ed.,(North
         Holland/WorldScientific,
                                Amsterdam/Singapore,    1987). The R parity
         can be defined in terms of an R quantum number as exp(J7ri?),
         and may be conserved multiplicativelyeven if R is not conserved
         additively;see G. Farrar and P. Fayet, Phys. Lett.76B, 575 (1978);
         P. Fayet, in Unificationof the Fundamental Particle Interactions,S.
         Ferrara, J. Ellis,and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, eds. (Plenum, New
         York, 1980); S. Dimopoulos, S. Raby, and F. Wilczek, Phys. Lett.
         112B, 133 (1982); G. Farrar and S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. D27,1731
         (1983),reprinted in Supersymmetry.
      3. S. Dimopoulos    and H. Georgi, Nucl. Phys. B193, 150 (1981),
         reprinted Supersymmetry, Ref. 2.
                   in
      4. R. D. Peccei and H. Quinn, Phys. Rev. Lett. 38, 1440 (1977); Phys.
         Rev. D16, 1791 (1977).
  4a. S. Dimopoulos and G. F. Giudice, Phys. Lett.B357, 573 (1995); A.
      Pomerol and D. Tommasini, Nucl. Phys. B466, 3 (1996); G. Dvali
      and A. Pomerol, Phys. Rev. Lett.77, 3728 (1996); Nucl. Phys. B522,
      3 (1998); A. G. Cohen, D. B. Kaplan, and A. E. Nelson, Phys.
      Lett. B388, 588 (1996); R. N. Mohapatra and A. Riotto, Phys.
      Rev. D55, 1 (1997); R.-J. Zhang, Phys. Lett. B402, 101 (1997);
      H-P. Nilles and N. Polonsky, Phys. Lett. B412, 69 (1997); D. E.
      Kaplan, F. Lepeintre, A. Masiero, A. E. Nelson, and A. Riotto,
      hep-ph/9806430, to be published; J. Hisano, K. Kurosawa, and Y.
      Nomura, Phys. Lett. B445, 316 (1999).This pattern of masses can
      arisenaturally from radiativecorrections;see J.L. Feng, C. Kolda,
      and N. Polonsky, Nucl. Phys. B546, 3 (1999); J. Bagger, J. L. Feng,
      and N. Polonsky, hep-ph/9905292, to be published.
  4b. B. W Lee and S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 39, 165 (1977); D.
      A. Dicus, E. W. Kolb, and V. L. Teplitz,Phys. Rev. Lett. 39, 168
      (1977).
  4c. S. Wolfram, Phys. Lett. 82B, 65 (1979); J. Ellis,J. S. Hagelin, D.
      V. Nanopoulos, K. Olive, and M. Srednicki,Nucl. Phys. B238, 453
      (1984).
  4d. P. F. Smith and J. R. J. Bennett, Nucl. Phys. B149, 525 (1979).
                             References                            243

 5. H. Georgi, H. R. Quinn, and S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett.33, 451
    (1974).
 6. S. Dimopoulos and H. Georgi, Ref. 3; J. Ellis,S. Kelley, and D.
    V. Nanopoulos, Phys. Lett. B260, 131 (1991); U. Amaldi, W. de
    Boer, and H. Furstmann, Phys. Lett. B260, 447 (1991); C. Giunti,
    C. W. Kim and U. W. Lee, Mod. Phys. Lett. 16, 1745 (1991); P.
    Langacker and M.-X. Luo, Phys. Rev. D44, 817 (1991). For other
    referencesand more recent analyses of the data, see P. Langacker
    and N. Polonsky, Phys. Rev. D47, 4028 (1993); D49, 1454 (1994);
    L. J. Hall and U. Sarid,Phys. Rev. Lett. 70, 2673 (1993).
 7. S. Dimopoulos, S. Raby, and F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev. D24, 1681
    (1981),reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 2.
la. P. Hofava and E. Witten, Nucl Phys. B460, 506 (1996); ibid.B475,
    94 (1996); E. Witten, Nucl Phys. B471, 135 (1996); P. Hofava, Phys.
    Rev. D54, 7561 (1996).
 8. H. Pagels and J. R. Primack, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 223 (1982).
 9. S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1303 (1983).
10. S. Dimopoulos and H. Georgi, Ref. 3; N. Sakai, Z. Phys. C 11, 153
    (1981). For reviews, see H. E. Haber and G. L. Kane, Phys.
          117, 75 (1985); J.A. Bagger, in QCD and Beyond: Proceedings
    Reports
    of the TheoreticalAdvanced Study Institutein Elementary Particle
    Physics, Universityof Colorado, June 1995, D. E. Soper, ed. (World
    Scientific,Singapore, 1996); V. Barger, in Fundamental Particles
    and Interactions:Proceedings of the FCP Workshop on
        Particlesand Interactions,Vanderbilt University,May 1997, R.
    Fundamental
    S. Panvini, T. J. Weiler, eds. (American Instituteof Physics,
          NY, 1998); J. F. Gunion, in Quantum Effects in the MSSM
    Woodbury,
    - Proceedings of the InternationalWorkshop on Quantum Effects in
    the MSSM, Barcelona, September 1997, J. Sola, ed. (World Scientific
    Publishing,Singapore, 1998); S. Dawson, in Proceedings of the 1997
    TheoreticalAdvanced Study Instituteon Supersymmetry, Supergrav-
    ity,and Supercolliders,  J. Bagger, ed. (World Scientific,Singapore,
    1998); S. P. Martin, in Perspectiveson Supersymmetry, G. L. Kane,
    ed. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1998); K. R. Dienes and C. Kolda,
    in Perspectiveson Supersymmetry, ibid.
11. S. Dimopoulos and D. Sutter, Nucl Phys. B194, 65 (1995); H.
    Haber, Nucl Phys. Proc. Suppl. 62, 469 (1998).
12. S. Dimopoulos and H. Georgi, Ref. 3; J. Ellisand D. V.
         Phys. Lett. HOB, 44 (1982); J. F Donoghue, H-P Nilles,and
    Nanopoulos,
    D. Wyler, Phys. Lett. 128B, 55 (1983). For strong-interaction
             to these calculations,see J.A. Bagger, K. T. Matchev, and
    corrections
244               28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

      R.-J. Zhang, Phys. Lett. B412, 77 (1997). Conditions under which
      limitson flavorchanging processes do not constrain squark masses
      are discussed by R. Barbieri and R. Gatto, Phys. Lett. HOB, 211
      (1981); Y. Nir and N. Seiberg, Phys. Lett.B309. 337 (1993). For a
      detailed review, see F. Gabbiani, E. Gabrielli,A. Masiero, and L.
                 Nucl. Phys. B477, 321 (1996).
      Silvestrini,
  13. M. K. Gaillard and B. W. Lee, Phys. Rev. D10, 897 (1974).
  14. J. Ellisand D. V. Nanopoulos, Ref. 12. Detailed resultsare given
      by F Gabbiani and A. Masiero, Nucl. Phys. B322, 235 (1989); J.
      S. Hagelin, S. Kelley, and T. Tanaka, Nucl. Phys. B415, 293 (1994).
      The most complete treatment is by D. Sutter,Stanford University
      Ph. D. thesis(unpublished) and S. Dimopoulos and D. Sutter,Ref.
      11.
 14a. M. Dine, R. Leigh, and A. Kagan, Phys. Rev. D48, 4269 (1993).
  15. For more recent reviews,see Y. Grossman, Y Nir, and R. Rattazzi,
      in Heavy Flavours II, A. J. Buras and M. Lindner, eds. (World
                Singapore, 1998); A. Masiero and L. Silvestrini,
      Scientific,                                              in
               on Supersymmetry, Ref. 10.
      Perspectives
  16. J. Ellisand M. K. Gaillard, Nucl. Phys. B150, 141 (1979); D. V.
      Nanopoulos, A. Yildiz,and P. H. Cox, Ann. Phys. (NY.) 127, 126
      (1980); M. B. Gavela, A. Le Yaouanc, L. Oliver, O. Pene, J.-C.
      Raynal, and T. N. Pham, Phys. Lett. 109B, 215 (1982); B. H. J.
      McKellar, S. R. Choudhury, X-G. He, and S. Pakvasa, Phys. Lett.
      B197, 556 (1987).
 16a. P. G. Harris et al, Phys. Rev. Lett. 82, 904 (1999).
  17. J. Ellis,S. Ferrara, and D. V. Nanopoulos, Phys. Lett. 114B, 231
      (1982); J.Polchinski and M. B. Wise, Phys. Lett. 125B, 393 (1983);
      M. Dugan, B. Grinstein,and L. Hall, Nucl. Phys. B255, 413 (1985).
  18. R. Arnowitt, J. Lopez, and D. Nanopoulos, Phys. Rev. D42, 2423
      (1990); R. Arnowitt, M. Duff, and K. Stelle,Phys. Rev. D43, 3085
      (1991); Y. Kizuri and N. Oshimo, Phys. Rev. D45, 1806 (1992).
  19. S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett.63, 2333 (1989); D. Dicus, Phys. Rev.
      D41, 999 (1990); J. Dai, H. Dykstra, R. G. Leigh, S. Paban, and D.
      A. Dicus, Phys. Lett. B237, 216 (1990); E. Braaten, C. S. Li, and
      T. C. Yuan, Phys. Rev. Lett. 64, 1709 (1990); A. De Rujula, M. B.
      Gavela, O. Pene, and F. J. Vegas, Phys. Lett. B245, 640 (1990); R.
      Arnowitt, M. J. Duff, and K. S. Stelle,Ref. 18; T. Ibrahim and P.
      Nath, Phys. Lett. 148B, 98 (1998).
  20. K. S. Babu, C. Kolda, J. March-Russell, and F Wilczek, Phys. Rev.
      D59, 016004 (1999).
                               References                           245

 21. R. Arnowitt, M. J. Duff, and K. S. Stelle,Ref. 18. In terms of the
     functions Ji and J2 in this reference,the function J here is taken
     as 2Ji + \J2, under the assumption that the graphs with the gluon
     attached to the squark or gluino linesadd constructively.
 22. H. Georgi and L. Randall, Nucl. Phys. B276, 241 (1980); A.
     Manohar and H. Georgi, Nucl. Phys. B238, 189 (1984); S.
          Ref. 19.
     Weinberg,
 23. W. Fischler,S. Paban, and S. Thomas, Phys. Lett.B 289, 373 (1992).
 24. J.Ellisand D. V. Nanopoulos, Ref. 12; F. Gabbiani and A. Masiero,
     Ref. 14; F. Dine, A. Kagan, and S. Samuel, Phys. Lett. B243 250
     (1990); F. Gabbiani, E. Gabrielli,A. Masiero, and L. Silvestrini,
     Ref. 12.
 25. S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett.40, 223 (1978); F. Wilczek, Phys. Rev.
     Lett. 40, 279 (1978).
 26. A. Brignole, J. Ellis,G. Ridolfi,and F Zwirner, Phys. Lett. B271,
     123 (1991); M. Carena, M. Quiros, and C. E. M. Wagner, Nucl.
     Phys. B461, 407 (1996); S. Heinemayer, W. Hollik, and G Wei-
     glein,hep-ph/9812472, hep-ph/9903404, hep-ph/9903504, to be
     published. The numerical resultsfor m/, cited here are taken from
     calculationsquoted by S. Dawson, Ref. 10.
 27. R. Barate et al. (ALEPH      collaboration),Phys. Lett. B412, 173
     (1997).
27a. M. Griinewald and D. Karlen, in Proceedings of the XXIX
     International
             Conference on High Energy Nuclear Physics, A. Astbury,
     D. Axen, and J. Robinson, eds. (TRIUMF, Vancouver, 1999).
 28. R. Barate et al.(ALEPH   collaboration),1999 CERN    preprint EP-
     99-011, to be published in Phys. Lett.A lower bound of 54.5 GeV
     had been obtained earlierfrom experiments on e+-e~ annihilation
     at 130 to 172 GeV by P. Abreu et al. (DELPHI       collaboration),
     Phys. Lett.B420, 140 (1998).
 29. A. J. Buras, M. Misiak, M. Miinz, and S. Pokorski, Nucl. Phys.
     B424, 374 (1994).
29a. R. Barate et al. (ALEPH    collaboration), 1999 CERN      preprint
     EP-99-014, to be published in Eur. Phys. J.
 30. M. Dine, W. Fischler,and M. Srednicki, Nucl. Phys. B189, 575
     (1981); S. Dimopoulos and S. Raby, Nucl. Phys. B192, 353 (1982);
     M. Dine and W. Fischler,Phys. Lett. HOB, 227 (1982); Nucl. Phys.
     B204, 346 (1982); C. Nappi and B. Ovrut, Phys. Lett. 113B, 175
     (1982); L. Alvarez-Gaume, M. Claudson, and M. Wise, Nucl. Phys.
246               28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

      B207, 96 (1982); S. Dimopoulos and S. Raby, Nucl. Phys. B219,
      479 (1983).This classof models was revived by M. Dine and A. E.
      Nelson, Phys. Rev. D48, 1277 (1993); D51, 1362 (1995); J. Bagger,
      Ref. 10; M. Dine, A. Nelson, and Y. Shirman, Phys. Rev. D51,1362
      (1995); M. Dine, A. Nelson, Y. Nir, and Y Shirman, Phys. Rev. D53,
      2658 (1996).For reviews,see C. Kolda, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl.62,
      266 (1998); G. F. Giudice and R. Rattazzi, hep-ph/9801271, to be
      published in Phys. Rep; S. L. Dubovsky, D. S. Gorbunov, and S.
      V. Troitsky,hep-ph/9905466, to be published. The phenomenology
      of these models is described by S. Dimopoulos, S. Thomas, and J.
      D. Wells, Nucl. Phys. B488, 39 (1997).
  31. S. Dimopoulos, G. F. Giudice, and A. Pomerol, Phys. Lett. 389B,
      37 (1997); S. P. Martin, Phys. Rev. D55, 3177 (1997).
  32. G. F Giudice and R. Rattazi, Nucl. Phys. B511, 25 (1998). This
      work has been extended by N. Arkani-Hamed, G. F Giudice, M.
      A. Luty, and R. Rattazzi,Phys. Rev. D58, 115005 (1998).
  33. N. Seiberg,Phys. Lett. B318, 469 (1993).
  34. K. S. Babu, C. Kolda, and F Wilczek, Phys. Rev. Lett. 11, 3070
      (1996).
  35. J. E. Kim and H-P. Nilles,Phys. Lett. 138B, 150 (1984); J. Ellis,J.
      F Gunion, H. E. Haber, L. Roszkowski, and F Zwirner, Phys. Rev.
      D39, 844 (1989); E. J. Chun, J.E. Kim, and H-P. Nilles,Nucl. Phys.
      B370, 105 (1992); M. Dine and A. E. Nelson, Ref. 30; M. Dine, A.
      E. Nelson, Y Nir, and Y Shirman, Ref. 30; G. Dvali, G. F Giudice,
      and A. Pomerol, Nucl. Phys. B478, 31 (1996); S. Dimopoulos, G.
      Dvali, and R. Rattazzi, Phys. Lett. 413B, 336 (1997); H-P. Nilles
      and N. Polonsky, Nucl. Phys. B484, 33 (1997); G. Cleaver, M.
      Cvetic, J. R. Espinosa, L. Everett, and P. Langacker, Phys. Rev.
      D57, 2701 (1998); P. Langacker, N. Polonsky, and J. Wang, hep-
      ph/9905252, to be published; J. E. Kim, hep-ph/9901204, to be
      published.
 35a. S. Raby, Phys. Lett. B422, 158 (1998).
 35b. D. A. Dicus, B. Dutta, and S. Nandi, Phys. Rev. Lett. 78, 3055
      (1997); Phys. Rev. D56, 5748 (1997).
  36. S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 1566 (1979); F Wilczek and A.
      Zee, Phys. Rev. Lett. 43, 1571 (1979).
  37. S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. D26, 287 (1982); N. Sakai and T Yanagida,
      Nucl. Phys. B197, 533 (1982).These articlesare reprinted in Super-
      symmetry, Ref. 2.
  38. S. Weinberg, Ref. 36.
                             References                            247

 39. J. Ellis,J. S. Hagelin, D. V. Nanopoulos, and K. Tamvakis, Phys.
     Lett. 124B, 484 (1983); V. M. Belyaev and M. I. Vysotsky, Phys.
     Lett. 127B, 215 (1983).
 40. V. Lucas and S. Raby, Phys. Rev. D55, 6986 (1997).
 41. This estimate is taken from a compilation of non-supersymmetric
     calculationsof the totaltwo-body decay proton decay ratein terms
     of the superheavy gauge boson masses Mx by P. Langacker, in
     Proceedings of the 1983 Annual Meeting of the Division of Particles
     and Fields of the American Physical Society (American Instituteof
     Physics, New York, 1983): 251. To express the resultin terms of
     g6, I have assumed that, in effect,the coupling ge that was used
     in these calculationswas given by gt = g2(Mx)/M\, where g(Mx)
     has the value appropriate to non-supersymmetric theories,with
                 ~
     g2(Mx)/4n      1/41.
 42. For more detailed(mostly model-dependent) calculations,including
     renormalization group corrections to g$, see S. Dimopoulos, S.
     Raby, and F Wilczek, Phys. Lett. 112B, 133 (1982); J. Ellis,D.
     V. Nanopoulos, and S. Rudaz, Nucl. Phys. B202, 43 (1982); W.
     Lang, Nucl. Phys. B203, 277 (1982); J. Ellis,J. S. Hagelin, D. V.
     Nanopoulos, and K. Tamvakis, Ref. 39; V. M. Belyaev and M. I.
     Vysotsky, Ref. 39; L. E. Ibanez and C. Mufioz, Nucl. Phys. B245,
     425 (1984); P. Nath, A. H. Chamseddine, and R. Arnowitt, Phys.
     Rev. D32, 2385 (1985); J. Hisano, H. Murayama, and T. Yanagida,
     Nucl. Phys. B402, 46 (1993); V. Lucas and S. Raby, Ref. 40. For
     a review, see P. Nath and R. Arnowitt, Phys. Atom. Nucl. 61, 975
     (1997).
42a. M. Takita et al.9in Proceedings of the XXIX International
     Conference
          on High Energy Nuclear Physics, Ref. 27a.
 43. K. S. Babu, J.C. Pati,and F Wilczek, Phys. Lett.423B, 337 (1998).
 44. V. Lucas and S. Raby, Ref. 40; T Goto and T Nihei, Phys. Rev.
     D59, 115009 (1999).
 45. L. Ibanez and G. Ross, Nucl. Phys. B368, 3 (1991).
                                  29


            Beyond        Perturbation            Theory




Most of the implications of supersymmetry discussed so far have been
inferred with the use of perturbation theory. In this chapter we shall
consider some resultsthat apply even when non-perturbative effectsare
taken into account.



        29.1      General Aspects of Supersymmetry      Breaking

Supersymmetry is not observed in the spectrum of known particles,so
it must be broken. We saw in the previous chapter that supersymmetry
breaking in the tree approximation of the standard model is
      ruled out, and that the large disparity between the electroweak
experimentally
breaking scale and the Planck or grand unificationscales suggests that
supersymmetry is likelyto be broken when some running gauge coupling
becomes strong. It is therefore essentialfor us to explore spontaneous
supersymmetry breaking without using perturbation theory.
   We saw in Section 26.7 that the supersymmetry of the action implies the
existence of a supersymmetry current S^x). This current is a Majorana
spinor in the sense of Eq. (26.A.2):

                          S"(xY = -PyseS^(x) ;                      (29.1.1)
itis conserved,
                                      =
                              dllSf(x) 0;                           (29.1.2)
and the integralof itstime component     is the supersymmetry   generator

                                         = Qp,                     (29.1.3)
                            Jd3xS0p(x)
for which the commutator    of — i(ocQ)with any operator gives the change
of that operator under a supersymmetry transformation with infinitesimal
Majorana spinor parameter a.

                                   248
            29.1 General Aspects of Supersymmetry Breaking             249

   The arguments that led to these resultsreliedon the supersymmetry
of the action; nothing depended on whether or not supersymmetry is
spontaneously broken, except perhaps for the assumption that the integral
(29.1.3)exists.In fact this assumption may be violated in theories with
massless fermions, which can have long range effects(or, equivalently,
poles at zero four-momentum) that would make thisintegralnot converge.
We willsee here that such massless fermions are necessary consequences of
supersymmetry breaking. In order to avoid the issueof the convergence of
thisintegraleven in theorieswith massless fermions, itis very convenient
to work in a space of finitevolume V. We can do thiswhile maintaining
translationinvariance by imposing periodic boundary conditions:allfields
are assumed to be unaffected by translationsof any spatialcoordinate xl
by an amount V1^.
   The existenceof an operator Qa that induces supersymmetric
         on quantum fieldswould allow us to derive allthe consequences of
transformations
supersymmetry, provided that there existsa supersymmetric vacuum state
|VAC) of zero three-momentum from which multiparticlestates may be
constructed by acting with fieldoperators. But if |VAC) is supersymmetric
in the sense that galVAC) = 0, then itfollows from the anticommutation
relation(25.2.36)that this state has zero energy as well as zero
      Conversely, by taking the vacuum expectation value of the positive
momentum.
operator (returning for a moment to two-component notation) {Qa, Q*},
we see that if the vacuum has zero energy then it must be annihilated
by Qa and Q*, and hence be supersymmetric, while ifitis not
supersymmetric
        then itsenergy must be positive-definite.  The question of whether
supersymmetry   isor is not spontaneously broken  is thus entirelya question
of whether  the vacuum  has a                 or
                              positive-definite  a zero  energy.
   The same reasoning led Witten to the conclusion that extended super-
symmetry with JV > 1 two-component spinor generators Qar and their
adjoints cannot be spontaneously broken to extended supersymmetry
with fewer generators or to simple supersymmetry, because if any one of
the generators does not annihilate the vacuum then the vacuum energy
cannot vanish, and it follows from this that none of the generators can
annihilatethe vacuum.1 Usually the energy of the vacuum state appears
as an ill-definedadditiveconstant in the energies of allstates,but here this
constant is given a meaning by the appearance of the energy-momentum
four-vector in the anticommutation relationsof supersymmetry. One of
the advantages of working in a finitevolume isthat itmakes itmeaningful
to talk about the totalenergy of the vacuum.
   Hughes, Liu, and Polchinski have pointed out that there are theories
that exhibit a sort of partly broken supersymmetry.la These theories do
not have a supersymmetry algebra of the sort described in Chapter 25.
Instead, they have an algebra of currents, based on anticommutation
250                    29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

relationslike Eq. (26.7.45):

              d\                      = - IX 5rsyv@^(y) +
          J        {Sr°a(x),S§00}                         2iy^Crs,

where 0^v is an energy-momentum         tensor satisfyingthe conservation
condition 3^0^   =  0, and Crs is a new ingredient,a constant. For JV = 1
thisconstant could be regarded as a term —rfC         in 0^v, but thisis not
possible for extended  supersymmetry   unless      oc
                                              Crs <5r5,   which need not be
the case.This algebra isnot ruled out by the Haag-Lopuszanski-Sohnius
theorem proved in Section 25.2 because it could not be a symmetry of
the S-matrix. It is true that spontaneously broken symmetries are never
symmetries of the S-matrix, but they are usually assumed to be based
on algebras or superalgebras that could be symmetries of the S-matrix
in some phases of some theories.With Crs not proportional to <5r5,       the
superalgebra  of currents  is one that could  not   generate a  symmetry of
the S-matrix in any phase of any theory. Here we will only consider
superalgebras of the sort described in Chapter 25, to which Witten's
argument does apply.
  Another advantage of working in a finitevolume is that all states
become discrete and normalizable. An immediate consequence of the
fact that Qa commutes with P^ is that any state of non-zero energy is
paired with another stateof the same energy and momentum        but opposite
          To see this,note that for any three-momentum p we may find a
statistics.
                                                *
two-component spinor ua such that ^abK^ab         P^> = 0 and ^2a \ua\2= 1.
(For p in the 3-direction,take u = (1,l)/y/2.For p in any other direction,
apply to this u the spin 1/2 representation of the rotation that takes
the 3-direction into the direction of p.) Then, within the space with
four-momentum    p^, the anticommutation relations(25.2.31)and (25.2.32)
give

                                    Q2(p) = p°,                      (29.1.4)
where Q(p) isthe Hermitian linearcombination of supersymmetry
generators:

                        Q(p) = £"aQa       + £";Q;.                  (29.1.5)
                                a             a

Acting with Q(p) on any normalized state |A")with four-momentum        p^
and p° > 0, we get another normalized state \Y) = Q(p)\X)/y^        with
opposite statisticsand the same four-momentum.       Furthermore, |A") is
the only state related to \Y) in this way, because if \Y) = Q(p)\X)/y^
then, according to Eq. (29.1.4),\X) = Q(p)\Y)/y/iP. The multiplicityof
supersymmetry generators and of spin stateswillusually cause these pairs
of fermionic and bosonic statesto be joined by other pairs,allwith the
            29.1 General Aspects of Supersymmetry Breaking            251

same four-momentum, but for the moment itis enough to know that all
statesof non-zero energy may at leastbe grouped in these pairs.
  When supersymmetry isbroken we do not expect stateswith a definite
number of particlesto form supermultiplets with other statesof opposite
statisticsand with the same four-momentum        and the same number of
particles.The   pairing of statesthen  requires the existence of a massless
fermion, so that an n-particlestate can be paired with a state of the
same energy and momentum         but opposite statistics,consisting of the
same n particlestogether with a massless fermion of zero energy and
momentum.     This massless fermion is known as a goldstino.To be more
precise,any n-particlestate is accompanied with two statesof the same
energy and momentum       and opposite statistics,containing an additional
zero-momentum     goldstino  of spin up  or down, and with another state
of the same energy and momentum         and the same statistics, containing
two additionalzero-momentum                 of                In
                                  goldstinos opposite spin. particular,
when supersymmetry is spontaneously broken the vacuum statehas
     energy, so itmust be paired with a fermionic stateof the same energy
nonzero
and zero momentum;     more precisely,the vacuum and the statecontaining
two zero-momentum     goldstinos are paired with the two statesof a single
zero-momentum     goldstino. It is only when supersymmetry is unbroken
that there isa stateof zero energy, the vacuum, that can be unpaired.
  The pairing of statesof non-zero energy provides a valuable diagnostic
toolthat can in some cases tellus that supersymmetry isnot spontaneously
broken, even where perturbation theory is not adequate to answer this
question. When all interactionsare weak, we can rely on perturbation
theory to give us a qualitativepicture of the spectrum. If itturns out that
in the tree approximation there are n vacuum stateswith zero energy, and
no massless fermions, then we can be confident that for weak coupling
there are no zero-energy fermionic stateswith which we could pair the n
vacuum states,so these unpaired stateswould have to have preciselyzero
energy. Then, as we increase the strength of the couplings or vary the
parameters of the theory in any other way, statesmay move from positive
to zero energy or vice-versa,but they will generally not suddenly appear
or disappear. (There is an exception for changes in the parameters that
change the asymptotic behavior of the Lagrangian for large fields;as we
will shortlysee,thiscan produce or destroy states.)Because each stateof
non-zero energy is always paired with another of opposite statistics,  they
can only make the transitionfrom zero to non-zero energy or vice-versain
such pairs,so the number of bosonic zero-energy statesminus the number
of fermionic zero-energy statesdoes not change as the parameters of the
theory are varied,as long as the large-fieldbehavior of the Lagrangian is
not changed. This differenceisknown as the Witten index? Formally, this
index is Tr(—1)F, where F is the fermion number; the pairing of states
252                  29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

discussed earlierinsures that thistrace can receive no contribution from
statesof non-zero energy. If the Witten index isnon-zero then there must
be some statesof zero energy, and so supersymmetry cannot be broken. In
particular,in a theory where the tree approximation gives n zero-energy
vacuum statesand no zero-energy fermions, the Witten index isn for weak
coupling, where the tree approximation can be trustedto give a qualitative
picture of the spectrum, and the index remains equal to n as the strength
of the coupling is increased,so we can be certainthat higher-order effects
or even non-perturbative effectsdo not break supersymmetry.
  As an example of the use of the Witten index, consider the Wess-Zumino
theory of a singlechiralsuperfieldwith a cubic polynomial superpotential
of the form (26.4.16):

                        M)    = im2d>2 + igcl>\

where <j>is the complex scalarfieldcomponent of the superfield.We saw
in Section 26.4 that thismodel does not exhibit supersymmetry breaking
in the tree approximation, but what about higher orders of perturbation
theory, and what about non-perturbative effects? Perturbation theory
gives a good approximation to the energy spectrum when m is large and
g is small; it tellsus that in this case there are two bosonic statesnear
zero energy, corresponding to the solutions <j>= 0 and <j>= —2m2/g of
the equation 3/(<£)/3<£= 0, and no fermionic states near zero energy;
the lowest-energy fermionic state is a zero-momentum     one-fermion state
of energy near |m|. In typical scalar fieldtheories we would not expect
the two bosonic statesto have preciselyzero energy; even though each
has zero energy in the tree approximation, higher-order effects(including
tunneling through the barrierbetween <j>= 0 and <j>= —2m2/g) would be
expected to mix them and shifttheir energies away from zero. (It is only
in the limitof infinitevolume that thisbarrierbecomes impassable.) But
in supersymmetric theories these statesmust have preciselyzero energy,
because there is no low-energy fermion state with which they could be
paired. Thus for m large and g small the Witten index is 2. Because
the Witten index is invariant under changes in the parameters of the
theory, the Witten index remains equal to 2 even when g is large,where
perturbation theory breaks down, and even when m vanishes, where the
two potential wells merge. (It is not easy to calculate the Witten index
directlyin this case, because of the presence in the tree approximation of
massless bosons as well as massless fermions.) Since the Witten index is
not zero, supersymmetry remains strictlyunbroken in the Wess-Zumino
model, whatever the values of itsparameters.
  The same arguments can generally be used in theories with several
chiralscalar superfieldsto show that the Witten index is positive,and that
supersymmetry isthereforenot spontaneously broken. The O'Raifeartaigh
            29.1 General Aspects of Supersymmetry Breaking           253

models discussed in Section 26.5 are an exception, because there are flat
directionsin which the potential remains constant as the fieldsgo to
infinity,rather than growing as some power of the fields.These models
provide a good illustrationof the fact that although the Witten index
must be zero for supersymmetry to be broken, a zero Witten index does
not necessarilyimply that supersymmetry is broken. For instance,if we
write the superpotential used as an illustration
                                               in Section 26.5 in terms of
canonically normalized  superfields,then ittakes the form

                  f(X, Yu Y2) = mYx{X -a) + gY2X2 ,
with arbitraryparameters m, g, and a. The potential isthen

                             + |m|2|x- a\2 + \myx + 2gxy2\2 ,
          U(x,yuy2) = \g\2\x\4
with lower-case lettersdenoting the scalar components of the left-chiral
superfields.For m and a non-zero and g small, perturbation theory gives
a good estimate of the spectrum, and tellsus that there isa minimum of
the potential near x = a — 2\g\2\a\4/\m\2with my\ + 2xy2 = 0, at which
the vacuum energy is approximately equal to \ga2\2V. Since this energy
appears as an additive constant in all states,there are no zero-energy
states,and the Witten index vanishes.The matrix Jt of second derivatives
of the superpotential(with rows and columns labelledin the order x, y\,
y2) ishere
                             / 2gy2   m   2gx \
                       Jt=      m     0    0    .
                             \ 2gx    0    0 /
This has an eigenvector (0, 2gx, —m) with eigenvalue zero, so there is a
massless fermion here; thisisthe goldstino associatedwith the breaking of
supersymmetry. The fermionic state degenerate with the vacuum consists
of a singlegoldstino of zero energy and momentum.     (Once again, there
are two vacuum-energy fermionic states,with opposite orientations for
the goldstino spin, and two vacuum-energy bosonic states:the vacuum,
and a statecontaining two goldstinos with opposite spin.)Now, as a —> 0
supersymmetry may become unbroken (and we shallsee laterthat itdoes),
but the Witten index must remain 0; in thiscase the massless fermion is
no longer a goldstino,but continuity demands that itsmass remains zero,
so it remains paired with the vacuum state.This of course is a general
feature of theoriesin which supersymmetry is restored at isolatedvalues
of the parameters; continuity demands that the massless fermion that
plays the role of the goldstino when supersymmetry is broken remains
massless (though no longer a goldstino) at the value of the parameters
where supersymmetry is restored,so that the vacuum remains paired with
the massless fermion state,and the Witten index remains zero.
254                  29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

  This model provides a good illustrationof why we had to qualify
the statement that the Witten index does not change when we vary
the parameters of a supersymmetric theory, with the proviso that the
parameters must not be changed in such a way as to alterthe asymptotic
behavior of the Lagrangian density for large fields.Suppose we unflatten
the flatdirectionin thismodel by adding a small term to the superpotential,
so that itnow reads

           f(X, YU Y2) = mYx{X -a) + gY2X2 + \e(Y2 + Y22),

where e is a small mass parameter. Now there are two solutions of the
conditions for supersymmetry to be preserved:

                         0=^1        = ^1 = ^1. '
                                dx     dy\  dy2
At these solutions,x is at one of the roots of the quadratic equation
2g2x2 + m(x — a) = 0, while y\ and yi are of order 1/e: y\ = —m(x — a)/e
and 3/2 = — g*2/e- We see that the reason that the Witten index can
change from 0 to 2 when we turn on the small parameter e is that two
new minima of the potentialcome in from infinitefieldvalues.
  In deciding whether or not supersymmetry is broken in theorieswith a
vanishing Witten index, itisoften useful to use conservation laws to limit
the pairings that may occur, and to define a new sort of index. If K is a
quantum operator that commutes with the supersymmetry generators Qa
(and hence also with the Hamiltonian), then allstatesof non-zero energy
that have a definitevalue for K are paired with statesof opposite statistics
and the same energy and momentum       and the same value of K. Also, not
only is the Witten index Tr(—1)F independent of the parameters of the
theory (as long as they are not varied in a way that varies the large-
fieldasymptotic behavior of the Lagrangian) — so also is the weighted
Witten index, given by Trg(K)(—1)F, where g(K) is an arbitrary function
of the conserved quantity. To use the conservation law in this way,
it is not necessary that it be unbroken when the volume V becomes
infinite;it is only necessary that K commute with the supersymmetry
generators.
   In diagnosing the possibilitiesof supersymmetry breaking, it is
sometimes
      helpful to work with a linearcombination  of weighted Witten indices
for a number of differentconserved quantities.In particular,consider the
quantity

                        WG = ^Tr{h(-l)F},                         (29.1.6)
                             heG
              29.1 General Aspects of Supersymmetry Breaking          255

with the sum running over allelements of some symmetry group G. (For
compact continuous groups, thissum should be interpretedas an integral
over the group volume, with a suitable invariant measure.) Within any
irreduciblerepresentationother than the identity,the 'characters'Tr h add
up to zero when summed over a finiteor compact group, so

                           WG = Y,W)(-l)f,                         (29.1.7)
                                 /

where N(f) is the number of times that the identityrepresentation of G
appears among stateswith fermion number /. In other words, Wq isjust
the Witten index, but evaluated using only G-invariant states.As long as
G is conserved, Wq remains independent of the parameters of the theory,
and ifnon-zero indicatesthat supersymmetry isunbroken.
  Conservation laws willbe used in this way in Section 29.4 to study the
spontaneous breaking of supersymmetry in gauge theories,but a simpler
(though academic) example is provided by the O'Raifeartaigh-stylemodel
discussed earlier,only now with the parameter a set equal to zero. The
superpotential here is

                       f(X, YU Y2) = mYxX   + gY2X2 ,              (29.1.8)

yieldinga tree-approximation potential

           U(x,yuy2) = H2\x\2 + \g\2\x\4
                                       + \myx + 2gxy2\2 .          (29.1.9)

We know that the Witten index vanishes here, because we have seen that
it vanished for a ^ 0, but is supersymmetry broken? With a = 0, there
are now fieldvalues with x = y\ = 0 where the potential vanishes in
the tree approximation, but how can we tellwhether effectsof higher
order in g or even non-perturbative effectsgive the corresponding statesa
small energy? To answer this,we note that this superpotential(and hence
the Lagrangian density) is invariant under a discretesymmetry K, under
which the superfieldsare transformed by

   KXK~X      = iX ,    KYXK~X   = -iYx ,    KY2K~l     = -Y2 .   (29.1.10)

(Note that this symmetry is violated by the term —maYx in the original
superpotential, so none of the resultsobtained using K will apply to
that superpotential.)Since the potential vanishes for x = yx = 0 and y2
arbitrary,for small g we may use perturbation theory to tellus that for
each y2 there isa bosonic vacuum statenear zero energy. For y2 = 0 this
vacuum iseven under K. For any non-zero value of |y21 we can take linear
combinations of the two zero-energy stateswith y2 = ±\y2\,of which one
256                    29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

willbe even under K and the other odd. As we have seen, there is also
a massless fermion here, the fermionic component of Y2, but thisfermion
is odd under K, so itcannot be paired with the even vacuum states.The
only other fermions in the theory have tree-approximation masses |m|,so
for small g they can't be paired with the even vacuum stateseither.We
conclude then that for small g the even vacuum statesmust have precisely
zero energy, and supersymmetry is unbroken. It is not easy to calculate
the weighted Witten index here, because there are an infinitenumber of
bosonic zero-energy states that are even under K, consisting of either
zero or two l^-fermions with zero momentum      plus any even number of
zero-momentum     Yi bosons, but itis clear that TrK(—)F > 0, and since
this is independent of g (as long as g ^ 0), supersymmetry cannot be
broken for any finiteg.




                29.2   Supersymmetry     Current Sum   Rules

We now turn to sum rules that yield exact quantitativerelationsbetween
the vacuum energy and parameters describing the strength of
supersymmetry
      breaking.
  Let us again start by assuming that the world is placed in a box of
volume V, with periodic boundary conditions to preserve translationin-
variance.The vacuum expectation value of the anticommutation relations
(25.2.36)may then be expressed as a sum over discretestates \X9Box):


                 J](VAc|ea|x,Box}(VAc|e/?|x,Box}*
                  x
                 +
                     J]/VAC|e^|A:,Box\/VAC|e;|x,Boxy
                      x
                          =                             ,       (29.2.1)
                              -2/(y^)a/?(VAc|p^|VAC)
with the label 'Box' indicating that the states are normalized to have
Kronecker deltas rather than delta functions as their scalar products.
Settingfi= a, summing over a and using Eq. (25.2.37)gives


                (VAC|eJx,Box)        =4(VAC|P°|VAC)             (29.2.2)
          Xjx

Because Qa commutes with the four-momentum, itis only stateswith zero
three-momentum and the same energy as the vacuum that can contribute
                29.2 Supersymmetry Current Sum Rules                 257

to this sum. To find the volume dependence of the matrix elements
that do contribute in Eq. (29.2.2),we note that a box-normalized state
\X,Box) containing Nx particlesis related according to Eq. (3.4.3)to the
corresponding continuum-normalized state \X) by

                                             Nx/2
                      X, Box) = {{Inf/V)            \x)          (29.2.3)


For stateswith px = 0, the spatialintegralof the supersymmetry current
time-component S® gives another factor of V, so we conclude that for
box-normalized stateswith p* = 0


                        =                                  .     (29.2.4)
     (VAc|ea|*,Box)         (27r)3^/V1-^/2(VAc|sa°(0)|z)

Since invariance under 27r-rotationsdoes not allow X to be a zero-particle
state,the dominant terms in Eq. (29.2.2)when V —► oo willbe those from
one-particlestates.In this limit,Eq. (29.2.2)becomes


                                                = 4pvAC,         (29.2.5)
                (27r)3^W|(VAc|sa°(0)|x)|2
                     Xjx

where pvac isthe vacuum     energy density


                      PVAC = (VAC|P°|VAC)/F,                     (29.2.6)


and the superscript (0) indicatesthat the sum in Eq. (29.2.5)runs only
over one-particlestateswith zero four-momentum.    These of course are
the two helicitystatesof the goldstino.
  We see again from Eq. (29.2.5) that if the vacuum energy density
does not vanish then the vacuum is not invariant under supersymmetry
transformations,but israther transformed into one-goldstino states.
         Eq. (29.2.2)shows that if the vacuum is not invariant under
Conversely,
supersymmetry then according to Eq. (29.2.2)its energy in a finitebox
cannot vanish, although itisconceivable that supersymmetry
      might take the vacuum only into multiparticlestates,in which case
transformations
the vacuum energy density would vanish in the limitof large volume.
  To evaluate the one-goldstino contribution in Eq. (29.2.5),we use
Lorentz invariance to write the matrix element of the supersymmetry
current
    between the vacuum and a one-goldstino state |p,<r), with momentum
258                   29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

p and helicityA, in the form*

                            = (27rr3/2       1+75
                                                           + if
          (VAc|s^(0)|p,A)                            (/F          F')


                                                              u(M),     (29.2.7)
                                   (^){fF*+iP»F>*)
where w(p,X) are the coefficientfunctions for a massless Dirac field
       in Section 5.5,and F and F' are unknown constants. The matrix
introduced
element (29.2.7)satisfies
                        a conservation condition pJWACLs^(O)     p,i\ = 0
because w(p,A) satisfiesthe momentum-space     Dirac equation (5.5.42)for
zero mass, and f ison the light-cone.The sum over helicities   gives
                                            = -i t/2p° .
                         Y^ "(p,X) w(p,X)
                          x
(The Dirac spinor w(p,A) for a massless particleof momentum      p and spin
X is not well defined for p —► 0, but there is no problem ifwe regard the
sum over X in Eq. (29.2.5)as a sum over helicities  for a small momentum
p of fixed direction.)After a straightforward  calculation,we then have
                                   — 75\
                  1+75    , r* 1           o-*             + 75
4pvAC =                  + F                                        i7l-75>
           Trj                              &»(rl
and therefore

                                Pvac = \F\2/2 .                         (29.2.8)
An alternativeproof of thisformula willbe given at the end of thissection.

* Lorentzinvariance alonewould yieldthisformulawith independentcoefficients
                                                                         FLi
  F'Land FR, F'Rforthematrices           to (1+ys)/2 and (1— y5)/2,
                              proportional                        respectively.
  ItisCPT invariance                       FR = F*Land F'R= F'*L.
                     thatimposestherelations                    To seethis,
                                                                          we
  must usetheCPT-transformation          ofthesupersymmetrycurrent
                                properties
                    CPTS^xXCPT)-1 = -y5S"(-*r = -peS<l(-x)
 (seeSection5.8)and oftheone-particle
                                    states
                             CPT|M)=;alP,-^}
 withx?.a phasefactorthatdependson how we definetherelative
                                                          phasesofthehelicity
       We alsoneedthereality
 states.                             ofthecoefficient
                            properties               functions
                                                             w(p,X).Theseare
 relatedtothoseoftheone-particlestates
                                     by thedefinition
                  <VAC|Vren(*)IM> = (27r)-3/2exp0>■x)ii(M)>
 where v>rEnM isa renormalized           withCPT-transformation
                             Majoranafield,                  property
              CPTtpREM^HCPT)"1 =y5Y>REN(-xr =Pe\pREN(-x).
 which yieldsw(p,A)= x*/?ew*(p,—X). Puttingthistogetherwith the
 CPT-transformationof the supersymmetrycurrentand one-particle
          properties                                        states
                                                                 yieldsthe
         FR = F*Land F'R= F'*L.
 relations
                  29.2 Supersymmetry Current Sum Rules                       259

  The parameter F plays much the same role in the interactionsof soft
goldstinos as does the parameter Fn (introduced in Section 19.4) in the
interactionsof soft pions. The matrix element of the supersymmetry
current between any two statesX and Y may be splitinto terms that
have a one-goldstino pole at p^ = 0 in the momentum transferp = Px~Py
and terms that do not have this pole


 (X\S"(0)\Y) =                 [yT + ipPF^ +                [y"F* +ip»F'*]
                  | (^)                           (^)                        J

                             M(X^Y+g)           + <X|S"(0)|Y)no pole, (29.2.9)

where UM(X -» Y + g) is the amplitude for emitting a goldstino with
four-momentum p and Dirac wave function w, and the subscript 'no pole'
denotes the terms in the matrix element that do not have the one-goldstino
pole in the four-momentum     p. The conservation of the current S^ tells
us that this vanishes if contracted with p^ so in the limit p^ -» 0 the
goldstino emission amplitude is**

  M(X   ^Y+g)^         _,•              +                               pole.
                          j(!±^)            (^^^Pfi(x\S^0)\Y)no
                                                               (29.2.10)
  There is another sum rule that provides an alternativeproof of the
existenceof goldstinos when supersymmetry is spontaneously broken, and
that also relatesthe parameter F and the vacuum energy density to the
D-terms and ^-terms that characterize the strength of supersymmetry
breaking. (This use of a sum rule is analogous to the second proof in
Section 19.2 of the existenceof Goldstone bosons when ordinary
symmetries
     are spontaneously broken.) To derive thissum rule,we willnow give
up the device of a finitevolume, and instead avoid the question of the
convergence of the integral(29.1.3)by working with a local consequence
of the supersymmetry of the action

                      =                     = *<53(*" y)*Z(x,0 + ''' >
  (S°(x,t)a) , Z(y,t)} [(aS°(x, t)), *(y,0]
                                                              (29.2.11)

**The
      amplitude{X\S^(0)\Y)no    may have polesthatgo as l/p •k as p^ —► 0; they
                             po]e
  would not arisefrom the goldstino propagator, which isexplicitly
                                                                 excludedin this
  matrixelement,butratherfrom otherparticle  propagators producedby theinsertion
  ofthesupersymmetrycurrentinexternal   linesofmomentum k oftheprocessX —► Y.
  Inthelimitp^ —► 0, thecontribution
                                   ofthesepolesinEq.(29.2.10) woulddominatethe
  amplitudesforemissionor absorption  of softgoldstinos.
                                                       But forsuch polesto arise,
  thegoldstinowould have to be emittedin a transitionbetweena pairof degenerate
          of oppositestatistics,
  particles                    which are not likelyto appear in theories
                                                                       in which
  supersymmetryisspontaneously  broken.The interactions of softgoldstinos
                                                                        differ
                                                                             in
  thisrespect
            from theinteractionsofsoftpions,photons,or gravitons.
260                      29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

where x(x) is an arbitrary fermionic or bosonic field,dx(x) is the change
in x(x) induced by the supersymmetry transformation with infinitesimal
parameter a that leaves the action invariant,and the dots denote terms
involving derivativesof <53(x— y).Let us consider the vacuum expectation
value of the anticommutator of an arbitrary left-handed spinor field
VlM   with the covariant conjugate S^(y) of the supersymmetry current.
By summing over a complete set \X) of intermediate states (including
integration over particlemomenta), this vacuum expectation value may
be put in the form

                                        =       d4p /**-»               +
  (VAC|{t/)La(x), S£(y)}|vAC)               j                 [<fy(p)       G%{-p)} ,
                                                                                 (29.2.12)
where

                =                                                            , (29.2.13)
       G*p(P)  E54(P-P^)(VACkLa(0)|x)                   (x\S}(0)\VAC)
                x
             =         ~                                                     . (29.2.14)
       G^(P)   £ d*(P PX)(VAC\S((0)\X)                 {x\xpLa(0)\VAC)

Lorentz invariance requires that the matrices Gii{p)and (^(p) must take
the forms:

                                 +
             G,(p) =                        y"&l\-p2)+        ^G{2\-p2)
                        %0)(i        Z5)

                        +p"G(3>(-p2)+       WG^i-p2)                            (29.2.15)

and


             <^)    =                       y"G(1)(-p2)+ #"G(2)(-p2)
                        %°)(^)

                        +rfcP\-p2)+         w&y-p2)                             (29.2.16)

The right-hand sides of Eqs. (29.2.15)and (29.2.16)are unaffected if we
replace — p2 with m2, multiply by a factor 8(p2 + m2), and integrate over
m2. In this way, Eq. (29.2.12)becomes

                                                 =                           y"G(1)(m2)
      (27r)-3(VAc|{v>L(x), S"(y)}|vAC)               (j-j^)    j™dm2

                                 - >
      - 0d"G(2)(m2) - id"G(3)(ro2)   0y"G(4)(ro2)A+(x-y,m)
                    29.2 Supersymmetry Current Sum Rules                        261


                                                                - id"G(3)(ro2)
                                     /G(1)(ro2) - ^G(2\m2)


                  -i^G{4\m2)         A+(y-x,m),                             (29.2.17)

where A+(x, m) isthe standard function
                                                    ■
      A+(x, m) = (2ti)-3f d*p 9(p°)5(p2 + m2) cxp(ip x).                    (29.2.18)

Causality requires that the anticommutator on the left-hand side of
Eq. (29.2.17)should vanish for spacelike separations x — y. For such
                  —                                — y, so Eq. (29.2.17)
separations,A+(x     y,m) is an even function of x
vanishes for allspacelikeseparations ifand only if

     G^\m2)       = -&l\m2),                G^2\m2) = -G<2>(m2),
                                                                            (29.2.19)
      G<3>(ro2)= +G<3>(ro2),                G<4V)   = +G<4 >(ro2),
so that for general x — y, Eq. (29.2.17)now reads

                                            =            G(1W      - G(2)(m2)?d»
 (2*)-3(VAC|{ia(x),         S"(y)}|VAC)         jTdro2

 -iG(3)(m2)d" - iG(4)(ro2)
                         $f           A(x - y,m) (—„                        (29.2.20)

where, as usual,
           A(x — y,m) = A+(x — y,m) — A+(y — x,m).                          (29.2.21)
We next impose the supersymmetry current conservation condition (29.1.2),
which (because DA = m2A) yields

     G(1)(ro2)= m2G(2\m2),                        = -ro2G(4)(m2).
                                       ro2G(3)(ro2)                         (29.2.22)
Finally,we must relatethese spectral functions to the breaking of super-
symmetry. Recall that for x° = y°,
          A(x - y,0,m) = 0,      A(x - y,0,m) = -i<53(x- y).
Setting x° = y° = t and \i= 0 in Eq. (29.2.20)thus yields
                                                = (2k)35\x -y)
       (VAC|{VL(M,           S°(y,0}|VAC)                         (j-j11)
                      x r      dm2            +          •                  (29.2.23)
                                     [G(3)(m2) G(4)(m2)|
Contracting on the right with an infinitesimalMajorana fermionic super-
symmetry transformation parameter a and using Eq. (29.2.11)then gives
              =                                            +         •
 i(dy>L)vAc       (2n)3(^^y            j™dm2      [G<3>(m2) G<4>(m2)] (29.2.24)
262                    29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

But Eq. (29.2.22)shows that the integrand of the integral over m2 in
Eq. (29.2.24)vanishes,except perhaps at m2 = 0, so we can conclude that
                        G{3\m2) + G{4\m2) = d(tn2)$ ,               (29.2.25)
with a constant coefficient^ given by



As we saw in Sections 26.4 and 27.4, a breakdown of supersymmetry is
signaled by the appearance of vacuum expectation values of the changes
dip under supersymmetry transformations of one or more spinor fields\p.
Eqs. (29.2.25)and (29.2.26)show that for any such spinor field,the spectral
function G^\m2) + G^\m2) has a delta function singularityat m2 = 0,
which could only arise from the appearance of a massless one-particle
state \g) in the sums over statesin Eqs. (29.2.13)and/or (29.2.14).For
the matrix elements (VAC\\p\g) or (g\\p\VAC) not to vanish, thismassless
particlemust have spin 1/2. This is the goldstino.
  Now let'scalculatethe contribution of a one-goldstino state |p,A) with
momentum     p and helicityX to the spectral functions G(l\m2). Lorentz
invariance tellsus that the matrix element of a general fermion field(not
just the renormalized goldstino field)in Eq. (29.2.13)takes the form*

                        =          amI+wUW1-*
      <VAC|V(0)|M)          ^372
                                                                (29.2.27)
where N is a constant, characterizing the particular fermion field.Also,
the delta function in Eq. (29.2.13)is

                     S\p - p%) = 2p°S(p2)d(p°)d\p - pg).
Together with Eq. (29.2.7),this yields



with the subscript 1 indicatingthe one-goldstino contribution.Comparing
thiswith Eq. (29.2.15)shows that
                                                       = (2n)-3NFd(m2),
      [G(2)(m2)l =i(2n)-3NF'S(m2),        [G(4)(m2)l
                                                                    (29.2.28)



f Again,Lorentzinvariance
                        would allowindependent           NL and NR for(1+ y5)
                                               coefficients
  and (1—75),          UsingtheCPT transformation
            respectively.                        oftheone-particle
                                                                 stateand the
        propertyofthecoefficient
  reality                     functionsdiscussed
                                               inthefirst
                                                        footnoteofthissection,
  and theCPT transformationof a generalfermionfield,
                                                   CPTy>(x)(CPT)-1= f}e\p(—x\
  we findthatNL=N*R.
                  29.2 Supersymmetry Current Sum Rules                          263

Thus Eqs. (29.2.25)and (29.2.26)yield

                                            = NF0LL '                     (29*129)
                               ,'(*Vl)vac
Evidently if the change in any fermion field under a supersymmetry
transformation has a non-zero vacuum expectation value then the N-
factorfor that fieldcannot vanish, so there must be a one-goldstino state
that contributes to these spectralfunctions.
  To be a littlemore specific,recallthat the fermionic components \pin of
a left-chiral
            scalar superfieldQ>lh obey the supersymmetry transformation
rule (26.3.15):

                     SipLn = sfid^n / aR + V2J%           aL ,            (29.2.30)
while Eq. (27.3.5)gives the supersymmetry         transformation of the gaugino
fieldsas

                     SIa = ( lJa,v bv, /] + iysDAy             .          (29.2.31)

Hence the iV-factorsin the matrix elements of the \pn and Xa between the
vacuum and a one-goldstino stateare given by

      Nn =                        ,       NA =                     •      (29.2.32)
             iF-^2(^n\AC                          -F-'(D.)VAC
  Let us see how the results(29.2.32)arisein the tree approximation. For
a renormalizable theory of gauge and chiralsuperfields,Eq. (27.4.30)gives
the left-handed part of the fermion mass matrix as

                Mnm = (*ML)                 '
                      \d<t>nd(t>m)
                                 9
                                     ^                                    (29.2.33)
                MnA = MAn = is/2(tA<l>o)n
                                       »            MAB    = 0.

The vacuum      fields 0„o are at a minimum          of the potential given by
            so
Eq. (27.4.9),

    0=               = ~         M«m^m0     + £                ,          (29.2.34)
                           E                       (<t>ltA)nDAo
         (p^)
where the J^s and Ds are given by Eqs. (27.4.6)and (27.4.7)

         &n = -(df(<f>)/d4>^* ,             DA = £A+J2                    ,
                                                               <f>n(tA)nm<f>m
                                                          nm
and the subscript 0 indicatesthat we are to set (j)n= 0„o- Furthermore,
the gauge invariance of the superpotential requires that

                               £^n(^)*=0,                                 (29.2.35)
264                   29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

for allvalues of 0. Therefore the left-handed quark mass matrix M             has
an eigenvector v with Mv = 0, where

                       vn = V^i n0 9         vA = iDA0                (29.2.36)

Thus in the treeapproximation, ifwe expand the left-handed fermion fields
in renormalized fieldsfor particlesof definitemass, then the coefficients
of the goldstino fieldin \pin and in Xal are proportional to s/l^no and
fD^o, respectively,in agreement with Eq. (29.2.32).
   If we normalize the spinor fields\pin and Xa so that the matrix
         these fieldsto the renormalized fieldsof particlesof definitemass
connecting
is unitary,then

                         ew,i2+eiam2=i                                 (29.2.37)


so Eq. (29.2.32)gives the non-perturbative result

                                    ,2
           i'i2=2£|(^)VAC                           VAC                (29.2.38)
                                         A

The result(29.2.38)for |F|2 allows us to express the vacuum expectation
density (29.2.8)in terms of the vacuum expectation values of auxiliary
fields

           Pvac                                                        (29.2.39)
                  -EK'-U'+jElMvJ

This is the non-perturbative generalization of the zeroth-order result
(27.4.9). It confirms a result used in Section 27.6, that the conditions
i&n) = (Da) = 0 are sufficientas well as necessary for supersymmetry to
be unbroken.
                                    * * *
  Itisinstructiveto see how Eq. (29.2.8)can be derived without the device
of a finitevolume. For thispurpose, consider the vacuum expectation value
of the anticommutator of two supersymmetry currents.By using Lorentz
invariance and the vanishing of anticommutators at spacelikeseparations
in the same way as in the previous section,we find

                                   = -i f                       + H{2)(m2)yvd^
  (VAC|{s"(x),     Sv(y)}|VAC)               dm2[H{1)(m2)y^dv

      +//(3)(m2) 03"3V +//(4)(m2) frf +//(5)(m2)^v^aAyp]A(x          -y,m2)
      + •••                                                            (29.2.40)
                   29.2 Super symmetry Current Sum Rules                265

where

            S\p - px)(VAC|s^(0)|z)(x|^(0)|vAC)  = H<l\-p2Wpv
      jdX
      + H(2\-p2)fp^ - H(3\-p2) Wp* + H{4\-p2) W
      + H^\-p2)e^pxyp     + ••• ,                         (29.2.41)
and the dots in Eqs. (29.2.40)and (29.2.41)denote a linearcombination
of the other independent Dirac covariant matrices 1,y$,ysy^, and [yff,yT],
which will not concern us here. The Majorana nature of the currents
together with Eq. (26.A.20) tellus that the spectral functions H^ are all
real,and the conservation of the supersymmetry currents dictatethat
            H(x\m2) = H(2\m2) = -m2 H(3\m2) - Hw(m2),             (29.2.42)
and

                             m2H(x\m2) = 0 .                      (29.2.43)
Setting \i = v = 0 and x° = y° in Eq. (29.2.40),integrating over x, and
using Eq. (29.2.42)then gives
                                   = (2n)3p (dm2            +
        (VAC|{g,    S°(0)}|VAC)                    [//(1)(m2) H(2\m2)

 +m2 H{3\m2) +           + ••• = (2tc)3£ / dm2 H{1\m2) + ••• . (29.2.44)
               H(4)(m2)]
To evaluate this anticommutator, we firstwrite itas
                                = -2iyfiT»v(x) + ••• ,           (29.2.45)
                   {<2, Sv(x)}
where T^v(x) issome tensor operator and the dots again denote some
linear
    combination of the other independent Dirac covariants.The Majorana
character of Q and S^ tellsus that T^v(x) is Hermitian; the conservation
of the supersymmetry current tellsus that itisconserved, in the sense that

                                  avT^v=0,                        (29.2.46)
and the anticommutation relation(25.2.36)tellsus that

                               d3x T^°(x) = P* .                  (29.2.47)
                            /■
These propertiesallow us to identifyT^v as the energy-momentum      tensor.
It is not in general equal to the symmetric energy-momentum     tensor ®^v
discussedin Section 7.4,but Eq. (29.2.47)shows that the energy density T00
can differfrom 000 only by spatialderivativeterms that cannot contribute
in statesof zero three-momentum, so the vacuum energy density is given
by

                         Pvac = (vAc|t°°|vAC)      .              (29.2.48)
266                  29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

Thus Eqs. (29.2.44)and (29.2.45)yield

                     2pvac = (2tt)3/ dm2 H{1\m2).                 (29.2.49)

But Eq. (29.2.43)tellsus that H(1)(m2) vanishes except perhaps at m2 = 0,
so

                     H(1)(m2) = 2(27r)-3<5(m2)pvAC•               (29.2.50)
Thus we see again that a non-vanishing vacuum energy density entails
the existence of a massless fermion, the goldstino. Using Eq. (29.2.7),
a straightforward calculation of the one-goldstino contribution to the
spectralfunctions yields
                      H(X\m2) = (2n)-3S(m2) \F\2.                 (29.2.51)
Comparing    this with Eq. (29.2.50)gives our previous result (29.2.8)for
the vacuum   energy density.


      29.3   Non-Perturbative    Corrections to the Superpotential

We saw in Section 27.6 that the superpotential in general supersymmetric
theoriesof gauge and chiral superfieldsis not renormalized to any finite
order of perturbation theory, so that if supersymmetry is not broken in
the tree approximation then it can only be broken by non-perturbative
corrections to the Wilsonian effectiveLagrangian. We now take up a
general analysis of these corrections.These were thoroughly studied in a
seriesof papers by Affleck,Davis, Dine, and Seiberg in the early 1980s,3
with specialattentionto the case of supersymmetric versions of quantum
chromodynamics with arbitrary numbers of colors and flavors.Here we
will present a somewhat simplifiedanalysis of general supersymmetric
gauge theories, based on the more recent holomorphy arguments of
Seiberg4 already used in Section 27.7.
  To study non-perturbative effects,we shallhere again consider a general
renormalizable supersymmetric theory, but now including a possible 6-
term in the Lagrangian density

  JSf=      e~v     + 2 Re            + Re
         [d>t   0>]        [/(O)]             g^] l^e*pWAaLWApL
                                                  Aap
                                                                (29.3.1)
where the superpotential /(O) is a gauge-invariant cubic polynomial in
              superfieldsand t is the parameter (27.3.23):
the left-chiral

                               x = —Ani_+ —9_ .                    (29.3.2)
                                    g2    2n
           29.3 Non-Perturbative Corrections to the Superpotential           267

As in Section 27.6, we introduce a pair of gauge-invariant left-chiral
external superfields,now called Y and T, and replace the Lagrangian
density with

 <£* =       e~v      + 2 Re                 + Re
          [fct   o]            [y/(0>)                g^] ^2eapWAaLWApL
                                                          Aap
                                                                 (29.3.3)
This becomes the same as (29.3.1)when we set the spinor and auxiliary
components of Y and T equal to zero, and take theirscalar components
as y = 1 and t = t, respectively.Non-perturbative effectswillin general
invalidateboth of the two symmetries on which the analysis of Section
27.6 was based. The translationoperation, which in our present notation
is T —► T + £ with real £, isnot a symmetry because ^2A e^paf^f^    can
have a non-vanishing integralover spacetime. The original R invariance
(with T and Y having R values 0 and +2) is not a symmetry because
the anomaly discussed in Chapter 22 gives the /^-currenta non-vanishing
divergence.With 6l and 6r having R = +1 and R = —l, respectively,and
VA and Q>n /{-neutral,the fermion fieldsXAl and xpnL have R = +1 and
R = —l, respectively,so Eq. (22.2.26)here gives

                 ^     = "               "
                                                     ewfiff     '         (29-34)
                             32^ (Cl         Cl) £

where C\ and C2 are the constants defined in Eqs. (17.5.33)and (17.5.34):

         ^ CAcdCbcd    = Ci ^     ,            Tr {tAtB} = C2 5^    ,     (29.3.5)
         CD
with the tracetaken over allspeciesof left-chiral
                                                superfield.*For instance,
in the generalized supersymmetric version of quantum chromodynamics
studied in Reference 3, with gauge group SU(NC) and JVy pairs of left-
chiralquark superfieldsQn and Qn in the defining representation and its
complex conjugate, these constants have values given by Eq. (17.5.35)
(with nf = 2Nf) as
                      Ci=NC9                         C2 = Nf.
  Although T translation and R invariance are invalidated by non-
perturbative effects,there is a remaining symmetry which is almost as

*A factor32 insteadof 16
                         appearsinthedenominatorin Eq.(29.3.4)becausegauginos
 do not have distinct            and we arenow countingantiparticles
                     antiparticles,                                 separately
 from particlesin takingthe tracein Eq. (29.3.5).Also,we are now adoptingthe
 convention,described attheend ofSection27.3,of including
                                                        a gaugecouplingfactor
 inthegauge fields and not instructureconstants
                                              and thematrixgenerators tA.The
 gaugegenerators arethusnormalizedso thatfortA,tB,and tc inthestandardSU(2)
 subalgebraofthegaugealgebra,  thestructureconstantisCABc = ^abc-
268                           29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

powerful. Consider a general R transformation
        0L^etoOL,              O^O,          Va^Va,     Y ^ e2i«>Y,           (29.3.6)
with arbitrary real <p. This leaves the T-independent terms of the La-
grangian density (29.3.3)invariant,but according to Eq. (29.3.4),
                                                                quantum
effectsviolate this symmetry, just as if there were a term AjSf in the
Lagrangian density with a transformation

                ^       ~* ^     ~                                       ■
                                      iL    (Cl"   Cl) £ 'wfiff*
                                                        A
Recalling Eq. (27.3.18),thisiscancelled ifwe give T a transformation
                                 T -► T + (Ci - C2)cp/n .                     (29.3.7)
Because Wa*l has R = 2, the whole theory including non-perturbative
     isinvariantunder the combined transformations (29.3.6)and (29.3.7).
effects
In particular,the superfieldexp(2mT), which for T = % is periodic in 0,
hasK = 2(Ci -C2).
  We again introduce an ultravioletcut-off,and consider the effective
'Wilsonian' Lagrangian

            =   dx{Q>,Q>\V,T,T\Y,Y\®-)
      <£\                                              ID

                +2 Re           E ^        WALa WALp + @x(<&,WL, T, Y)       , (29.3.8)
                          ^
                                Adp
with six and $x both gauge-invariant functions of the displayed
        The term proportional to T has been separated from the function
arguments.
Six in order that the translation(29.3.7)of T should continue to cancel the
anomaly   in the R transformation (29.3.6).Invariance under the combined
transformation (29.3.6),(29.3.7)then tellsus that terms in the function
Six must be proportional to powers of exp(2mT), which have definiteR
values.
  Furthermore, itis only positivepowers of exp(2mT) that may appear in
Six-According to Eq. (27.3.24),itis only instantons with positivewinding
number v > 0 that can make contributions to the effectiveLagrangian
that are holomorphic in T rather than T*, and these give riseto factors
exp(2mvT). More generally,for T = x any power exp(2/a7rT) willdepend
on the gauge coupling through a factor exp(—8n2a/g2), so that a must
be positive in order for non-perturbative effectsto be suppressed for
small g. In consequence, non-perturbative effectsenter in 5£\ through
operators exp(2maT) that have positive-definite,  zero, or negative-definite
values of R, depending on whether C\ > C2, Ci = C2, or C\ < C2.
(In the generalized supersymmetric version of quantum chromodynamics
         293 Non-Perturbative Corrections to the Superpotential        269

described above, this corresponds to Nc > Nf9 Nc = JVy, and Nc < Nf9
             We shallnow consider each of these cases.
respectively.)



                                  Ci>C2

Here the powers exp(2ianT) with a > 0 have positive-definite  values of R,
given by Eq. (29.3.7) as R =  2(C\ — Ci)a. Lorentz invariance tellsus that
ifany term in Six contains a factor Wa*l, then itmust contain at leasttwo
of them, so the only ways to construct terms in Six with R = 2 isto have
two Ws and no dependence on Y or T, or one Y and no dependence on
W or T, or one factor of exp(2inT/(C\ — C2)) and no dependence on W
or Y:

  Six = Yfx(<b) + ]T eapWAaLWBpB          txABW   + exp (z^r)     tu(*) •
                                                        VCl   C2/
                  afiAB
                                                              (29.3.9)
Because fx(Q>) does not depend     on Y or T, it can only be the tree-
approximation superpotential
                             /*(*) = /(*),                         (29.3.10)
just as in perturbation theory. Likewise, because £xab(Q>)does not depend
on 7 or T itmust have equal numbers of Os and O^s, so since itdoes
not depend on O^ itcannot depend on O either.Gauge invariance then
requires (for a simple gauge group) that Sxab(Q>) is proportional to 5Ab,
and since itdoes not depend on T or 7, the power-counting argument
of Section 27.6 shows that the coefficientof Sab can only be the one-loop
contribution to the running inverse-square Wilsonian gauge coupling.
  To be more explicitabout the running gauge coupling, recallthat in
non-supersymmetric gauge theories with fermions, Eq. (18.7.2)gives the
one-loop renormalization group equation as

                                     = bgl,                        (29.3.11)
                              ^
with



with the coefficientof C2 taken as —1/6 rather than —1/3 because we
are now counting the left-chiralstatesof antifermions separately from the
left-chiral
          statesof particles.As we have seen in Section 28.2,the effectof
gauginos is to multiply the Ci-term by a factor 9/11, while the effectof
the scalar components of the left-chiral superfields(such as squarks and
sleptons)isto  multiply the C2-term by a factor 3/2, so in supersymmetric
270                       29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

theories Eq. (29.3.12)becomes instead

                              fc=              .                (29.3.13)
                            -j^j(3Ci-C2)
The solution of Eq. (29.3.11)for the running gauge coupling is then



where K is an ultravioletcut-off,introduced to give meaning to the
otherwise ultraviolet-divergent
                              bare gauge coupling g.
  To summarize the resultsso far,settingT = t and Y = 1,the Wilsonian
effectiveLagrangian for C\ > C2 takes the form

            =                                               €apWAaLWApL
      <£\       ^(a>,a>t,K,T,T*,^---)]D+2Re
                                                      Aap

                +2 Re [f(0>)]^+ exp           M*)]*     ,                 (29.3.15)
                                      (^^r)
where
                                  4th
                             t, = — + —_0_ .                     (29.3.16)
                                   gj    2tt
We have been able to replace x with %x in the exponential in the last
term in Eq. (29.3.15),because the differenceisa constant times In A, which
yieldsa power of X that can be absorbed into the definitionof v%.
  Non-perturbative effectshave now been isolated in the last term in
Eq. (29.3.15). This term can be generated by instantons of winding
number v > 0 if C\ — C2 = 1/v. (In general C\ — C2 isa rationalnumber.
For the generalized supersymmetric version of quantum chromodynamics,
C\ — C2 = Nc — Nf isan integer,so the condition C\ — C2 = 1/v requires
that Nc = Nf — 1, and then only v = 1 instantons contribute. Detailed
calculations5in this model show that instantons actually do make such
contributions.) Whether or not it is instantons that generate the non-
perturbative contribution i^(O),we can determine itsform by considering
the non-anomalous symmetries of the theory. Since this function is
independent of 7, it can be evaluated as if Y = 0, so it shares all the
non-anomalous symmetries of the firstterm in Eq. (29.3.1).These include
the gauge symmetry itselfand a global symmetry under Hd S U(n(d)\
where d labelsthe differentirreduciblerepresentationsof the gauge group
furnished by the left-chiralsuperfields,and n(d) is the number of times
representation d occurs. (For instance, in generalized supersymmetric
quantum chromodynamics      d takes two values, labelling the Nc and Nc
representations of SU(NC)9 and n(Nc) = n(Nc) = Nf.) Let us label the
Os as O^f, where a is a gauge index, and i is a 'flavor'index, labelling
         29.3 Non-Perturbative Corrections to the Superpotential      271

the n(d) differentOs that transform under the gauge group according to
the representation d. The only way to construct a function of the Os
that is invariant under the global symmetry group Y\dSU(n(d)) is as a
product of Os, with the n(d) flavor indices contracted for each d with
the antisymmetric SU(n(d)) tensor eihjn{d)9and with the gauge indices
contracted with constant tensors of the gauge group. (For instance,
for generalized supersymmetric quantum chromodynamics, vx must be a
function of the sole invariant


                                       a
which isnon-zero only for Nc> Nf.)
  In addition to the anomaly-free S U(n(d)) flavorsymmetries, there isalso
a Ud(l) symmetry for each of the irreduciblerepresentationsd furnished
by the Os, with allO^- for a given d undergoing the transformation

                                0<y _> em<s>W .                  (29.3.17)
This symmetry is anomalous, with the effectsof the anomaly the same as
ifthe Lagrangian underwent the change

           * "> * - E                £ WKV*           ,          (29.3.18)
                       n^£r
                     d                A
where C^d isthe contribution to Ci of any one left-chiralscalar superfield
belonging to the irreducible representation d of the  gauge group. The
symmetry  isrestored ifwe give T  the transformation property
                          T^T      + n{d)C2dcpd/n .              (29.3.19)
Since i^(O) is accompanied in Eq. (29.3.9)by a factorexp(2inT/(C\ — C2)),
which undergoes the transformation


  «p(£^n«p(±«^)-p(ak)-M
we conclude that for each representationd of the gauge group furnished
by the left-chiralscalars, vx(<S>)must be a homogeneous function of the
                                      — C2). (For instance,in generalized
O^. of negative order —2n(d)C2d/(C\
supersymmetric quantum chromodynamics we have two irreducible
           of SU(NC)9 the defining and antidefiningrepresentations,each
representations
with n(d) = Nf and C^d = 1/2, so vx is a homogeneous function of order
          —
—Nf/(NC     Nf) in the Q belonging to the defining representation and of
the same order in the Q belonging to the antidefiningrepresentation.Thus
itmust be proportional to D~x^Nc~Nf\ where D is the determinant
       earlier.)In general C2 = ^2dn(^)^2d, so vx(Q>)is a homogeneous
introduced
function of allthe Os, of order — 2C2/(C\ — C2).
272                  29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

  This resultsatisfiesan important consistency check. Recall from Section
27.4 that any superpotential has dimensionality +3 (counting powers of
mass, with h = c = 1),while the scalar superfieldsO like ordinary scalar
fieldshave dimensionality +1, so the O-dependent part of vx must appear
with a coefficientof dimensionality

                              2C2      3d - C2
                           C\ — C2       C\—   C2
This coefficientdoes not depend on the gauge coupling or on any of the
couplings or masses in the superpotential,and because we have replaced
the bare coupling g with gx in the second term of Eq. (29.3.11)itcannot
depend on the ultravioletcut-offK used to define g either,so itcan only
depend on X. Therefore

                     ^(O) = i(3C,-c2)/(C1-c2)//(a))
                                                ^                 (29.3.21)
where H(Q>) is a homogeneous function of order —2n(d)C2d/(C\ — C2) in
the Os that belong to each representation d of the gauge group and is
independent of any parameters of the theory. We can rewrite Eq. (29.3.14)
in the form




where A is an energy parameter that characterizes the running gauge
coupling, likethe A « 200 MeV of quantum chromodynamics. Thus the
lastterm in Eq. (29.3.15)is

                     vxm    = exp (-pA-A       A<3C>-C^<C'-C>> if(*).
                                   V C\ — C2 )
                                                                  (29.3.23)
The whole effectivesuperpotentialincluding the non-perturbative
     (29.3.23),is thereforeindependent of the floatingcut-offX.
contribution
   The function H(Q>) is homogeneous and of negative order in O, so in
the absence of a bare superpotential the potential is positive-definite at
finitevalues of the scalar fieldsand vanishes only at infinitefieldvalues.
In such a theory, there is no stable vacuum state,and the question of
supersymmetry breaking ismoot. The vacuum may be stabilizedby adding
a suitablebare superpotential.For instance,in generalizedsupersymmetric
quantum chromodynamics       with Nf < Nc the only renormalizable bare
superpotential is a sum of  mass terms

                        f(Q,Q) = y£rnijQaiQaj.                    (29.3.24)
                                 ija
To seek a supersymmetric vacuum      state,we need firstof allto find what
         29.3 Non-Perturbative Corrections to the Superpotential         273

scalarcomponents   qai and qai satisfyEq. (27.4.11),which here reads
                                ~                          = °>      (29.3.25)
                   Yl 9li(U)abqbi Yl 9«'(^U«w
                   abi            abi
for all generators tA of SU(NC). The gauge interactions (but not the
superpotential)are invariantunder simultaneous SU(NC) transformations
on the color indicesa of both qai and qai;under independent SU(Nf) and
SU(Nf) transformations on the flavorindicesi of qai and qah respectively,
and under a 17(1)transformation of both qat and qai by opposite phases.
Using these symmetries, itis possible to put the general solution of these
conditions in the form
                                   f Uidai         a<Nf
                    ** = «* =                                  '     (29*126)
                                   ( 0             a>Nf
where the ut are complex numbers with the same phase. (Here is the
proof. The SU(NC) generators tA span the space of alltracelessHermitian
matrices,so Eq. (29.3.25)is equivalent to the requirement that
                                    ~
                       S       q*™qbi Y       QriQbi= kSab ,         (29.3.27)
                           i              i
for some constant k. By a combined color and flavor transformation
q —► UqV with U and V unitary and unimodular, we can put the matrix
q in the diagonal form (29.3.26),and by a unimodular change of phase of
the diagonal elements we can arrange that they allhave the same phase.
Then Eq. (29.3.27)becomes

                                 J \u2a-k)6ab           a<Nf
                E_*_                                    a> Nf

The conditions for a> Nf show that k < 0. If k were non-zero, then the
qai would furnish Nc non-zero orthogonal vectors with Nf components,
which is impossible for Nf < NC9 so k = 0. We can then put the qai in the
diagonal form (29.3.26)by a seriesof unitary flavortransformations: first
rotate qu into the 1-direction;then keeping the 1-directionfixed,rotate
in the space perpendicular to thisdirection to put ~q2iin the 2-direction;
and so on; and then perform a unimodular phase transformation so that
alldiagonal elements have the same phase. Eq. (29.3.27)then shows that
the absolute values of the diagonal elements of qai and qai are equal, and
by a non-anomalous opposite phase change of qai and qai we can arrange
that theircommon phases are equal, as was to be proved.)
  The function H in Eq. (29.3.23)is here

 H(q,q) = J [Dety Y^aj]'1^'^                     = S
                                                       [U"]^"^     > (29-3-28)
274                   29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

where J is a purely numerical constant. (Detailed calculationsshow that
J = 2 for Nf = 2 and Nc = 3.)Adding the terms (29.3.23)and (29.3.24),
the complete effectivesuperpotential isnow
                                       '
                                  i-2/W-N/)   ^     2
           ftoUq,q) = ^[Uu]               '+£»»<«?,                   (29329)

where

            X   ^ y exp (Tr^1A         AWc-Nf)Me-Nf)                  (29 3 30)

and the m, are the diagonal elements of the mass matrix that results
when the original mass matrix is subjected to the SU(Nf) x SU(Nf)
transformation used to put the scalarsin the form (29.3.26).The condition
(27.4.10),that ftotalisQ) should be stationary,has the solution




Because we have put the scalar fieldsin a basis in which the u,-have a
common    phase, the m, must also have a common       phase in this basis.
But the common      phase of the uj is not unique — the l/Nc powers
in Eq. (29.3.31) tellus that the solution is undetermined by a factor
exp(2i7rn/iVc),with n an integer ranging from 0 to Nc — 1. (The two
signs of ut for a given uj are physically equivalent, because the whole
theory is invariant under a non-anomalous symmetry with qai —► elnqai
and qai —► e~lnqai) The fact that there are Nc physically inequivalent
solutions will turn up again in our discussion of the Witten index in the
next section.




This case is of some interestbecause, as we saw in Eq. (27.9.3),the
simplest N = 2 supersymmetric Yang-Mills theory, when written in terms
of N = 1 superfields,contains a single left-chiral
                                                 superfieldin the adjoint
representation, for which** of course C2 = C\.
  For C2 = C\ the function exp(2i7rT) has R = 0, so that itsappearance
in JS?\is not restrictedby R invariance.The general form of the F-term

**Note thathere refers   to the representation
                                            of the gauge group furnished
                Ci                                                      by the
  chiral          so itisthesame as thequantityC\ inSection27.9,which refers
        superfields,                                                        to
  the representation
                   furnishedby complexscalars,but halfof C[, which refers
                                                                        to the
               furnished
  representation        by allspinorfields,
                                         includingthegauginos.
         29.3 Non-Perturbative Corrections to the Superpotential      275

in jSf*is given here by Eq. (29.3.9),but with the lastterm absent:

   @x = y/A(*,exp(2wr))+         £ eapWAaLWBpBfUB(<!>,exp(2inT)).
                                afiAB
                                                                  (29.3.32)
Because fx may depend on T, we cannot now conclude that it is equal
to the bare superpotential,but only that it depends linearlyon whatever
coupling coefficientsand masses appear linearlyin the bare
superpotential.
     In particular,if there is no superpotentialto begin with, then none is
generated by non-perturbativeeffects.
  To go further,we need to make use of the anomalous chiral symmetry
under a (7(1)transformation of allthe 0„. In order for the whole theory
to be invariantunder thissymmetry, itis necessary to introduce a separate
                   superfield Yr for the terms in the bare superpotential
external left-chiral
of order r in the 0„. Then the theory is invariant under the combined
transformations

    *„ -+ e^n   ,      T -+ T + C2cp/n ,       Yr -+ e'^ Yr.     (29.3.33)
This symmetry tellsus that a term in &x that isof order Jfr in the
      of the term in the superpotential of order r in 0 and proportional
coefficients
to Qxp(2ainT) must be of an order Jf® in O, given by

                        jTq = J2 rJTr ~ 2C2a .                   (29.3.34)
                               r
  The coefficients^xab °f the terms in Six that are quadratic in W
are shown in Eq. (29.3.32)to be independent of the parameters in the
superpotential for C\ = C2, so in thiscase Eq. (29.3.34)becomes

                             jTq = -2C2a .                       (29.3.35)
Thus there can be no terms in t^AB of positive order in the Or, and any
term in {^ab that is independent of the Or must be independent of T.
These O-independent terms in t^AB are therefore again just the one-loop
contribution to the running coupling parameter x^.
  The effectivesuperpotential isshown by Eq. (29.3.32)to be linearin the
parameters in the superpotential,so allof itsterms have just one Jfr = 1
and the others zero. For such a term Eq. (29.3.34)gives

                            JTq = r - 2C2a .                     (29.3.36)
A term in the effectivesuperpotential with Jf® powers of 0 can therefore
only arise from terms in the bare superpotential with r > Jf® powers
of O. The terms with r = Jf® have a = 0, so they are given by the
tree approximation as just the bare superpotential.The only other terms
are non-perturbative corrections with r > Jf®. Such a non-perturbative
276                    29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

term, of a given order in the Os, can only arise from terms in the bare
superpotential of higher order in the Os.


                                 Ci<C2

Here the R value 2(C\ — Ci) of exp(2i7rT) is negative,so positivepowers
of exp(2i7rT) can compensate for the positiveR values of Y and Wa, and
Six maY therefore contain terms of arbitrary order in Y and Wa. Using
the chiralsymmetry condition (29.3.34)and the R invariance condition
                  2 = JTW + 2j2^r-        2a(C2 -Ci),              (29.3.37)
                               r
we can, however, set limitson the structureof terms of a given order Jf®
in the <Ds.Eqs. (29.3.34)and (29.3.37)have a trivialsolution with JTr = 1
for r = Jf®, Jfr — 0 for other values of r,and a = J^w = 0; thissolution
just representsthe presence in Six of the originalbare superpotential,with
no radiative corrections. If there is no superpotential to begin with,
then Jfr = 0 for all r, so Eq. (29.3.35)does not allow any terms in the
Wilsonian Lagrangian with Jfw = 0, and so no superpotentialcan be
generated. (In the supersymmetric version of quantum chromodynamics
thisconclusion isusually derived by noting that there isno possible term in
the superpotential that would be consistentwith allsymmetries, but as we
have now seen, the conclusion ismuch more general.)For renormalizable
asymptotically free theoriesthere is a useful limit on the structure of 0-
independent terms in Six-The condition of renormalizabilitytellsus that
JTr = 0 for r > 3, so by subtracting2/3 of Eq. (29.3.34)from Eq. (29.3.37)
we find

                  2>         + JTW + 2a (Ci             .          (29.3.38)
                        ^o                    ~\c2}
Asymptotic freedom requires that 3Ci > C2, so for Jf® = 0 (or Jf® > 0)
each term on the right-hand side is positive.It follows that we can have
no O-independent terms of higher than second order in W, and these
terms are also independent of T, so they again represent the one-loop
contribution to the running coupling parameter %x- But for C\ < C2 there
is no general prohibition against terms of second or higher order in W
and negative order in O.


         29.4   Supersymmetry     Breaking   in Gauge   Theories

We now turn to a question of great physical interest:in what gauge
theoriesis supersymmetry spontaneously broken?
            29.4 Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories             277

  Let us startwith an Abelian gauge theory,the supersymmetric version of
quantum electrodynamics described in Section 27.5.This is a 17(1)gauge
theory with two chiral superfields0+ carrying (7(1) quantum numbers
±e9 and superpotential /(O) = mO+O—           We saw in Section 27.5 that
supersymmetry    isbroken  in the tree approximation ifwe include a Fayet-
Iliopoulos  term  £[V]d in  the Lagrangian density,so the Witten index is
zero for £ ^ 0 and small e, and hence also for all values of e and £,
including £ = 0. Is supersymmetry unbroken for £ = 0? It is unbroken in
the tree approximation, but how can we tellifhigher-order correctionsor
non-perturbative effectsgive the vacuum a finiteenergy in thiscase?
  To answer this we shall use a symmetry principle of the theory for
£ = 0, in the way that was described in general terms in Section 29.1.The
symmetry here is charge conjugation: the whole Lagrangian density is
invariant under the charge conjugation transformation of the chiraland
gauge superfields:
                  CO+C"1   = 0>+,       CKC"1   = -V.             (29.4.1)
There isa massless fermion in the tree approximation, the photino, but if
we take the vacuum to be even under C then the one-photino stateisodd
under C, so these statesare not relatedto each other by multiplicationwith
the supersymmetry generator. The chiralfermion here has mass m in the
tree approximation, so for small e itis not paired with the vacuum either.
With no fermionic state available to pair with, the vacuum state must
have strictlyzero energy, at leastfor e small enough so that perturbation
theory gives a good qualitativepicture of the spectrum. As we saw in
Section 29.1, the zero energy of the vacuum implies that supersymmetry
isnot broken. Likewise, the photino must be strictlymassless,since ithas
no bosonic statewith which to pair.
  Now, what about values of e that are so large that perturbation theory
cannot be trusted at all?The Witten index itselfis no help here, because
itvanishes.Instead,letus consider the weighted Witten index, TrC(—1)F.
We have seen that for small e and £ = 0 the vacuum has zero energy, and
thereare also two zero-energy statescontaining a zero-momentum photino
of spin up or down, and a bosonic zero-energy statecontaining two zero-
momentum     photinos of opposite spin. The vacuum makes a contribution
+1 to TrC(—1)F; the two one-photino states make a contribution +2
(because both C and (—1)F are —1); and the two-photino statemakes a
contribution +1, giving a weighted Witten index TrC(—1)F = 4. This is
independent of the value of e, so even for strong couplings the weighted
Witten index is 4, and so supersymmetry is not broken.
  There isa complication here.2In counting zero-momentum       statesin the
tree approximation, we have not considered the zero-momentum
       of the gauge field V^(x). A constant term in Vq(x) is no problem,
components
278                 29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

because itcan be removed by a gauge transformation

                        V,(x)^V,(x)    + d,A(x),                  (29.4.2)
with gauge parameter A(x) proportional to x°. On the other hand, we
cannot simply remove a constant term in K,-(x),because thiswould require
a gauge transformation with A(x) proportional to x',which would conflict
with the assumed periodicityof the fieldsunder translationsby the box
dimension L = K1/3. In the particularmodel under consideration here all
fieldshave charges ±e or zero, so this periodicityis preserved ifwe limit
ourselves to a latticeof gauge transformations with


                                       i
where t\ are three positive or negative integers. Therefore although we
cannot remove the zero-momentum        components of V((x) by a gauge
transformation,  we  can freely shiftthem  by amounts 2n^i/eL. The tree-
approximation Lagrangian (notLagrangian density)for the x'-independent
part of V^ in a gauge with Vo = 0 is simply — jL3J2i(doVi)2, so the
Hamiltonian is +jL~3J2i(ni)2> where 7r,is the canonical conjugate to V[\
%i = L3doVi. The wave function *F(V) for this fieldis then just like that
of a free particle of unit mass in three dimensions, in a box of linear
dimensions 2n/eL with periodic boundary conditions.The wave functions
of definiteenergy are proportional to exp(fk •V), with energy k2/2L3, and
ki = eL^i, with t\ integers.There isa unique zero-energy stateof thisfield,
with ki = 0 and with a normalized wave function equal to the constant
(eL/2n)3/2. Because thisstateis unique, our counting of zero-energy states
is unaffected by the gauge degree of freedom, and the weighted Witten
index isindeed 4.
   Now letus consider the theory of a simple non-Abelian gauge superfield,
without chiral superfields. Witten's 1982 paper2 on the Witten index
presented an argument that for such theoriesthisindex is r+1 (or possibly
—r — 1),where r isthe rank of the gauge group, the maximum      number of
commuting generators.In 1997 he found a correction to thiscalculation,6
with the resultthat for the classicalunitary,orthogonal, and symplectic
groups the index is a Casimir invariant C\9 which for the unitary and
symplectic groups isindeed equal to r + 1, but for the orthogonal groups
O(N) with N > 1 and the exceptional groups takes a differentvalue. In
general, thisCasimir invariant isdefined by Eq. (17.5.33):
                                      = g2CxdAB ,
                       £ CacdCbcd                                 (29.4.4)
                       CD
where g isa coupling constant,whose definitioncan be made unambiguous
by specifyingthat when the generators f^,£b, and tc are restrictedto the
            29.4 Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories            279

three generators of the 'standard'SU(2) subalgebra that was used in the
calculationof instanton effectsin Section 23.5, the structureconstant is
simply geABc- For the classicalgroups, we have

                    (   N           SU(N)
               Ci = I N-2           SO(N) for N > 3     .        (29.4.5)
                    { N + 1         USp(2N)

For SU(N) the rank is r = N - 1, while for USp(2N) itis r = N, so in
both cases r + 1 = C\. But SO(N) with N > 6 has rank r = (N - l)/2 =
(Ci +1)/2 for N odd and r = N/2 = (Ci +2)/2 for JV even, and the index
is Ci, not r + 1. Of course, thisdoes not affectthe main conclusion that,
since the Witten index is not zero, supersymmetry is not spontaneously
broken. Kac and Smilga showed in 1999 that the index is also equal to
C\ for exceptional groups.7 We shallcalculatethe Witten index here only
for SU(N) and USp(2N) supersymmetric gauge theories with no chiral
superfields,but in the course of thiscalculationwe willalso see why the
orthogonal and exceptional groups present specialdifficulties.
  The general strategy of thiscalculationis the same as for the Abelian
theoriesconsidered previously.We firstexamine the statesof zero energy,
to seeifthereare any that cannot be paired by action of the supersymmetry
generator.Ifthere are,then as long as the coupling isweak enough so that
the tree approximation gives a good qualitativepicture of the spectrum,
we know that these unpaired states really have precisely zero energy.
We can then find some non-zero weighted Witten index, which will be
constant even for stronger couplings, and conclude that supersymmetry is
not broken for any coupling strength.
  There is another complication here, that did not enter in the earlier
example of an Abelian theory with charged chiral superfields.As usually
formulated, general renormalizable theoriesof gauge bosons and gauginos
with no chiralsuperfieldsdo not contain any dimensionless parameters at
all,so that thereisno coupling parameter that can be adjusted to make the
couplings weak. Instead we have a running coupling constant, depending
on the ratioof the energy to a characteristicenergy scale A, likethe scale
A « 200 MeV for quantum chromodynamics          discussed in Section 18.7.
For non-Abelian theoriesthe gauge coupling constant becomes strong at
energies below A, however weak it may be at higher energies. But here
we are working in a box of volume L3, which provides an infraredcut-off
at an energy « 1/L, that is normally lacking in theories with unbroken
gauge symmetries. When we speak of a weakly coupled gauge theory,
itshould be understood that we mean one with a coupling that is small
down to energies of order 1/L. In this case, it is essentialto be able to
argue that supersymmetry isbroken for strong as well as weak couplings,
280                    29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

in order to be able to draw any conclusions at allabout the realistic
                                                                    limit
of infinitevolume.
  We willwork in temporal gauge, where V% = 0. The Lagrangian density
(27.3.1)is then
 * =                                                        + iEft*   (29-4-6)
       -j£/i7-iY&VM?-\£(^(PX)A)

where, in temporal gauge,
                                 -
                  fAij = dtVAj       dj VAi + E CABC VBi Vcj ,        (29.4.7)
                                              BC
                {DiX)A = diXA + E CABC VBiXc ,                        (29.4.8)
                                BC
                (/MU   = d*kA .                                       (29.4.9)
(As usual,the gauge coupling constant or constants are included as factors
in the structureconstants Cabc) Without chiral superfields,there is no
other dependence on the auxiliaryfieldDa ; since itenters quadratically,
it may be put equal to the value at which the Lagrangian is stationary,
Da = 0, and ignored from now on. Retaining only the x-independent
modes, the effectiveLagrangian becomes

       fd3x S£ = L3 - 1 E                             -
      J                    (E^bcVbiVcj)2                  \ YjiWAii
                   L    Aij BC                               Ai

                                                -
                  ~2    ^ cABc{hyiVBi^c)            1^^°^
                       ABCi
The Hamiltonian is then

H =                                               £ CABcfavtVmXc)       ,
      TO   E*Ai+^Y,(Y,CABcVBiVCj)2+^
            Ai        Aij BC                     ABCi
                                                                 (29.4.11)
where %Ai = L3doVAi is the canonical conjugate to Vau
  The gauge fieldconfigurations with zero energy in the tree
     are those for which Y^bc ^ABcVBiVcj = 0 for all A9 i,and j. This
approximation
condition is always satisfiedif VBi vanishes for all i except where ts is
in a Cart an subalgebra of the gauge Lie algebra.* For the unitary and

*A Carton          isany subalgebraspannedby r-independent
          subalgebra                                       generatorst^ that
 commute withone another,thatis,forwhich CAtf@vanishesforalltA when t^ and
 t® areintheCartan subalgebra,where r isthe rank,themaximum number of such
                       fortheS U(3)symmetry of stronginteractions
           For instance,
 generators.                                                     discussedin
 Section19.7,therank isr = 2, and theCartan subalgebracan be takento consist
 of thethirdcomponent of isospint^and the hyperchargetg,which acton the light
 quarkswiththecommuting matricesdenotedA3 and A8 in Eq.(19.7.2).
            29.4 Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories            281

symplectic groups and their direct products this is the only way that it
can be satisfied.The same istrue for the orthogonal gauge algebras O(N)
with N < 6, which are all equivalent to symplectic and/or unitary Lie
algebras (see the Appendix to Chapter 15),but not for orthogonal gauge
algebras O(N) with N > 7, which is why Witten's original calculation
needed correctionfor thiscase.
   In the restof thiscalculationwe will only consider gauge algebras like
the symplectic and unitary algebras for which the condition of zero energy
in the tree approximation does require the Vsi to vanish for alli except
where ts is in a Cartan subalgebra of the gauge Lie algebra. With all
Va% = 0 except for the V^i for which tj is in the Cartan subalgebra, the
zero-energy modes of the fermion fieldare those also with Xa = 0, except
for the Xtf for which tj isin the Cartan subalgebra.
   Now we must count these states. The eigenvalues of the tj in any
representation of a semi-simple Lie algebra are quantized, so by gauge
transformations allvalues of the non-zero gauge fieldsV^\ are equivalent
to values in a finitebox with periodic boundary conditions. The
quantization
        of these modes is just like that carried out for the gauge fieldin
the U(l) model considered above, so the zero-energy stateof these fields
is again unique, with a constant wave function in the box.
   The multiplicityof stateswith zero energy in the tree approximation
comes entirely from the fermion degrees of freedom. It is convenient
to use a two-component notation, in which instead of a four-component
Majorana field A^a for each generator of the Cartan subalgebra, we
have two left-handed fieldsX^La with a = +1/2, and their right-handed
Hermitian adjoints X^La. These gaugino fields satisfy the canonical
anticommutation relations


and



By operating on an arbitrarystatevector with as many factorsof X^La as
necessary,we can construct a statevector |0) which is annihilated by all
ArfLa- The general zero-energy state vector is then a linearcombination
of products of the X^La acting on |0).
  To see which of these statesmay be paired with each other by the action
of the supersymmetry generator, we must take account of a symmetry of
the theory. The zero-energy condition, that the gauge and gaugino fields
lieonly in directionscorresponding to the Cartan subalgebra, isinvariant
under the subgroup of the originalgauge group consisting of elements h
that leaves this subalgebra invariant,that is,for which h~xt^h is a linear
combination of the t@. These form a finitegroup, known as the Weyl
282                  29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

group. For instance, in the defining representation of SU(N) the Weyl
group consists of permutations of the N coordinate axes, together with
multiplicationby a phase needed to make the transformations unimodular.
These can be represented by products of the finitegauge transformations
W(iJ) = exp(in(j(ij)/2)= io(ij)with i ^ j that permute the ith and
7*thcoordinate axes, where o(ij) is the U(N) generator with [<r(ij)]lj  =
         =
[v(iJ)Vi h     and   with all other elements zero. These  transformations
induce orthogonal transformations in the space spanned by the diagonal
tracelessHermitian matrices t^ that generate the Cartan subalgebra in
the adjoint representation.For instance,for the group SU(2) we can take
the Cartan subalgebra to consist of just £3, and the Weyl group then
consistsof the unit element and a singlenon-trivialgauge transformation
W(12) = "7(1,2) = iau for which W'h^W            = -t3. For SU(3) the
Cartan subalgebra has the two generators A3 and k%, and the Weyl group
consists of the six gauge transformations 1, W(l,2), W(2,3), W(l,3),
W(1,2)W(2,3), and W(2,3)W(1,2), which generate rotations by multiples
of 60° in the space spanned by £3 and fs-
  Assuming the vacuum to be invariant under the Weyl group, it can
be paired by action of the supersymmetry generators only with other
statesthat are invariant under the Weyl group.** This may or may not
include the previously constructed zero-energy state |0). The condition
that the state |0) be annihilated by allk^La is obviously invariant under
the Weyl group, so ifitis unique thisstatemust furnish a one-dimensional
representation of the Weyl group. The Weyl group always acts on the
generators of the Cartan subalgebra by orthogonal transformations, so
there are two such representations:the invariant representation,in which
each Weyl transformation is represented by unity,and the pseudoinvariant
representation,in which each Weyl transformation is represented by the
determinant of itsaction on the generators of the Cartan subalgebra.
  Let us firstconsider the case where |0)isinvariantunder the Weyl group.
Obviously no linearcombination of the one-fermion states A^L JO) can
be invariantunder the Weyl group. There isjust one Weyl-invariant linear
combination of the two-fermion states;itis of the form E/|0),where

                         U=Y,eab^La^Lb.                            (29.4.12)
                              absf
(The spin indicesa and b are contracted with the antisymmetric tensor eat
defined by Eq. (25.2.9),because the anticommutation relationsmake the

**Witten remarked that
                       physicalstatesare necessarily
                                                  Weyl-invariant,but we will
                                                       of the vacuum and of
  not need to go intothishere,becausethe Weyl invariance
  the supersymmetrygeneratorsmeans thatonlyWeyl-invariantstatesarerelevanto
  spontaneous upersymmetrybreaking.
            29.4 Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories                 283

product ^LaA*^Lb    antisymmetric in a and b.) There are various Weyl-
invariantlinearcombinations of products of three or more generators of
the Cartan subalgebra, but the anticommutation of the k*^La makes allof
them vanish^ except for powers of U. Also, in the product of more than
r of the Us some of the X^La would have to appear twice, so Ur+1 = 0.
We conclude then that the Weyl-invariant statesare limited to the r + 1
states

                       |0), U\0),U2\0),...,Ur\0).                   (29.4.13)
These are allbosonic states,and there are no fermionic stateswith zero
energy in the tree approximation with which they could be paired, so for
           weak coupling these statesmust have preciselyzero energy, and
sufficiently
supersymmetry isunbroken. Also, the Weyl-invariant Witten index here is
r + 1, and thisis independent of the coupling strength,so supersymmetry
isnot spontaneously broken whatever the strength of the gauge coupling.
   In the case where the state |0) is pseudoinvariant, the only Weyl-
invariantstatesare of the form

                       E    e^-^La^Lb-'\0),                         (29.4.14)



 To seethisforSU(N), notethateach generatort.<t  of itsCartan subalgebramay
 be writtenas a linearcombinationt^ = ^. <v/T, of generatorsT, of the Cartan
 subalgebraof U(N),withtheonlynon-zeroelementofeach T,being(T,)',   = 1 (with
                                                     we must have JT cv,= 0.
       not summed). In orderforthe t^ to be traceless,
 indices
 SincethefieldsX*^LatransformundertheWeyl group likethet.*, itfollowsthatfor
 a function                   *"
          Yl^a- &rf®-K<jLaK%Lb tobe Weyl-invariant,                d^...must
                                                     thecoefficients
 taketheform
                                =
                           d.4£..-       c#i'''D'J >
                                  2_^ crfi
                                   ij...
 where the D,7 are invariantensors, in the sensethatfor any vectorsw„ vj9etc.,
 the functionD(u,v,...)=                 isinvariant under permutationsof the
                          ^2i,Dij...uiVj...
 coordinate axes.The most generalsuchfunctionisa linearcombinationof products
 ofthefunction
                                      =          •••
                          S(x,y,z,...)  ^2 xxyxzx ,
                                         i
 with argumentsx,y,z,...takenas varioussubsetsof the u, v, etc.But because
 Yltc**i= 0>m ourcasetnesum °ftnecomponentsofeachvectorvanishes,    so D(u)=
 S(u)= 0; D(u,v)is proportional to S(u,v);D(u,v,w)is proportional to S(u,v,w);
 D(u,v9w9x)isa linearcombinationof S(u,v,w,x),  S(u,v)S(w,x),            and
                                                             S(u,w)S(v,x),
 S(u,x)S(v,w); and so on. The importantpointis that,even though the function
 D(u,v,...)may not be symmetricin itsarguments(becausedifferent productsof Ss
 may appearwithdifferent            thefunctions
                         coefficients),                   aresymmetric.In our
                                                 S(u,v,...)
 case,thevectorsaretheanticommutingquantities u(a),= ^ ^ X^ Uac.<^\,
                                                                 forwhichthe
 onlynon-vanishing S functionisS(u(l/2),u(—1/2)).
                                                With a suitable
                                                              normalizationof
 thegenerators,thisistheoperatorU.
284                     29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

where 6^^... is the totally antisymmetric tensor of rank r. This is
completely symmetric among the a, b,...,so each stateischaracterized by
the number of these indices that are +1/2 rather than —1/2, a number
that can take any value from 0 to r, so the number of independent states
isr + 1. Depending on whether r iseven or odd, these statesare eitherall
bosonic or all fermionic, so the Witten index here is +(r + 1),and again
supersymmetry is not spontaneously broken.
  There is an interestingrelationbetween the value of the Witten index
obtained here and ideas of how certain global symmetries become broken.
The Lagrangian for a supersymmetric gauge theory isinvariant under the
transformations of a global (7(1)'/^-symmetry,'which change the left-and
right-handed parts of the gaugino fieldsby opposite phases:
                 *al -► elnAL ,               XAR -+ e-[nAK     ,   (29.4.15)
with cp an arbitrary real constant phase. The conservation of the current
J$ associated with this symmetry isviolated by an anomaly

              = "            cacd CBCD fA fBG W               >     (29.4.16)
         Vs         TTT  E
                    *L% ABCD

where as usual e^vp(7is the totallyantisymmetric quantity with 60123= 1.
(This isobtained from Eq. (22.2.24)by taking the gauge group generators
tA as (tA)BC = —iCABc, because the gauginos are in the adjoint
       of the gauge group, and by multiplying the anomaly with a factor
representation
1/2, because  the gauginos do not have distinctantiparticles.)With the
definitionof the gauge coupling specifiedabove, Eq. (23.5.20)gives the
integralof the product of fieldstrengths in the anomaly as
                                                = 64;r2v/g2 ,       (29.4.17)
                    W               E/r/7
                           J/d4x     A
where the 'winding number' v is an integer characterizingthe topological
class to which the gauge field belongs. Putting together Eqs. (29.4.4),
(29.4.16),and (29.4.17),we see that an instanton of winding number v
induces a change in R = j d3x J$ given by

                         AR=       f d4x Vs    = "2vCi •            (29.4.18)

That is,the effectiveaction contains terms (XUafrAa La^A Lb^ab)Cl and its
integer powers that, instead of being invariant under the /^-symmetry
transformations (29.4.15),are transformed by integerpowers of the phase
exp(2i(pCi).Thus instantons invalidateinvariance under the general (7(1)
/^-transformation (29.4.15),reducing it to the group Z2C, of
      (29.4.15)with cp an integer multiple of n/C\. We might expect
transformations
that the growth of the gauge coupling at low energy would lead (as in
            29.4 Supersymmetry Breaking in Gauge Theories            285

quantum chromodynamics) to the appearance of vacuum expectation
values
    for gaugino bilinears,which would mean that the discretesymmetry
group Z2C, is spontaneously broken to itsZ2 subgroup, generated by a
simple sign change of the gaugino multiplet. Then there would be C\
zero-energy states |n),given by acting on any one vacuum state \X) with
the elements exp(innR/Ci) of Z2cP with n running only over the values
0, 1, ...,C\ — 1 because we treat as equivalent any pair of states that
differonly by action of the generator exp(i7r/?)of Z2. Since \X) can only
be a linear combination of states with even values of R, we can form
C\ stateswith allvalues 01 = 0, 2, ...,2C\ — 2 of R by taking the linear
combinations




In particular,for SU(N) and USp(2N) these statesare the same as the
Weyl-invariant statesencountered in the calculationof the Witten index
in the case where the state |0) is ^-invariant, and Weyl-invariant rather
than pseudoinvariant. The operator U defined by Eq. (29.4.12)has R = 2,
so there are r + 1 = C\ states Un\0) with R = 2n running from zero to
2r = 2C\ — 2. More generally,the presence of C\ zero-energy stateswith
the same statisticshelps to explain why the Witten index is equal to ±C\
for the exceptional and orthogonal as well as the unitary and symplectic
groups.
  The fact that the Witten index is non-vanishing for all pure gauge
supersymmetric theories means that to find examples of spontaneous
supersymmetry breaking we must add chiral superfields to the theory.
It does not help to add massive chiral superfields to the theory, since
for weak coupling the introduction of massive fieldsdoes not change
the menu of zero-energy states. We have already seen an example of
this: the work of Affleck, Dine, and Seiberg reviewed in Section 29.3
showed that an SU(NC) gauge theory with Nf < Nc left-chiral    superfields
Qai in the defining representation of SU(NC) and an equal number of
left-chiralsuperfieldsQai in the complex conjugate representation,with
a mass term YjaijmijQaiQaj>has Nc zero-energy bosonic states and no
zero-energy fermionic states.(This is one case where the Witten index is
not leftunchanged when a mass term vanishes, because this mass term
is the term in the superpotential of highest order in the superfields,so
that a vanishing mass changes the behavior of the superpotential for large
superfields.In fact,Eq. (29.3.31)shows that as the masses go to zero the
scalarfieldvalues in the stateof zero energy go to infinity.)
  On the other hand, there is no difficultyin finding theories with left-
chiral superfieldssubject to a symmetry that keeps them massless, in
which supersymmetry is dynamically broken. For instance, consider an
286                  29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

SU(NC) gauge theory with Nf left-chiral  superfieldsQat and Nf left-chiral
superfieldsQai again in the Nc and Nc representationsof the gauge group,
but now also with Nf left-chiral superfieldsL, that are neutral under the
gauge group SU(NC). Assume a global (or weakly coupled local)SU(Nf)
symmetry, acting on the 'flavor'i indices of the Qs and the Ls but not
the gs, which among other things forbids a mass term linking the Qs and
Qs. We take Qai and L,-in the representations Nf and Nf of SU(Nf),
respectively,while the Qs are taken to be SU(Nf) singlets. The only
renormalizable superpotential is then of the form

                      f(Q,Q,L) =                                 (29.4.19)
                                     ^jQajQaiLi,
                                     ija
where the &J are a set of coupling constants, which by an SU(Nf)
rotation may be chosen to have only one non-vanishing component, say
the one with j = Nf, which can also be chosen to be positive.(This is a
generalizationof a model treated by Affleck,Dine, and Seiberg,8in which
they took Nc = 3 and Nf = 2.) The gauge-neutral superfieldsLi have no
effecton the non-perturbative terms in the effectivesuperpotential,so we
can use the resultof Section 29.3,that for Nc > Nf the gauge interactions
yield a totaleffectivesuperpotential
                                                           i-1/iNc-Nf)
      /totals Q,L) = J2 VjQajQaiLi + X    ~[iteUj £ MajUat
                                                     QajQai]
                     ija                           a
                                                                  (29.4.20)
with X a constant. In order for supersymmetry to be unbroken it is
necessary (though not sufficient) that the scalar components qaj,~qap and
                                                                   = 0, so
ti of the chiral superfieldssatisfythe condition 3/totai(4>4><0/d*M-
that, for all i,
                                            = °-                 <29A21>
                            5>J^**

But thistellsus that the matrix X)a QajQaihas a zero eigenvalue,and
therefore
     has zero determinant, so thisisa singularpoint of the superpotential
(29.4.20),at which itis impossible for dfioidi\/8qai
                                                  or 3/totai/5^a7to vanish.
Supersymmetry is therefore necessarilybroken in thisclassof models.
  For instance,Affleck,Dine, and Seiberg8 found the non-vanishing scalar
components qaj,qap and t\ of the superfieldsOa„ Oa„ L, at the minimum
of the potentialin theirmodel with Nc = 3 and Nf = 2 to be at the values

                      411= 4ii = 1.286 (Jf/2^)1/7,
                      422 = 422 = 1-249 (JT/2^)1/7 ,             (29.4.22)
                       'l = V All " ^22 >
                      29.5 The Seiberg-Witten Solution                   287

where the vacuum    energy density is

                          Pvac = 3.593 (16^10/^4)1/7 •             (29.4.23)

Also, Jf = 2A7 for 0 = 0.
  The fact that supersymmetry is spontaneously broken in this case
encouragesus to think that itwillbe broken by strong gauge forcesin a wide
range  of asymptotically free gauge theories,and thus lends legitimacy to
the speculations about supersymmetry breaking in Section 28.3.



                   29.5     The Seiberg-Witten   Solution*

Itoften happens that the tree-approximation potentialin a supersymmetric
theory willtake the value zero for a continuous range of scalarfieldvalues.
(For one example, see Eq. (29.1.9).)  In thiscase the theory has a number
of scalar excitationswith zero mass in the tree approximation, which
since supersymmetry is unbroken must be accompanied with suitable
fermionic superpartners.At low energies the theory willthen be described
by a family of supersymmetric effectiveLagrangians, whose members are
parameterized by one or more moduli, the scalar expectation values in the
underlying theory. Quantum effectsin the underlying theory can modify
the dependence of the effectiveLagrangian on these moduli, and even
alterthe topology of the space of moduli.9
  In one of the most strikingaccomplishments of the 1990s in super-
symmetry theory, Seiberg and Witten10 were able to calculate the exact
dependence of the low-energy effectiveLagrangian on a modular
    in gauge theorieswith N = 2 supersymmetry. The ideas behind this
parameter
calculationcan be made apparent by running through only the simplest
specialcase, that of an SU(2) gauge theory with N = 2 supersymmetry
and no additional matter hypermultiplets.
  We saw in Section 27.9 that the Lagrangian density for this theory is
given afterelimination of the auxiliaryfieldsby

      *-i
                    A                       A

            -2 V2Re                                ~
                          J2 6abc (^al6XPcl) 4>b       7 2/W:
                          ABC                             A


' Thissectionlies omewhat out of thebook'smain lineof developmentand may be
  omittedina first
                 reading.
288                    29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

                                       e
                                  +
           -\Y,{^ipx)A)               64n2 wE/r/7-^(0><n>
                                                                   (29.5.1)
where A, B, and C now run over the values 1, 2, and 3. We have now
rescaledallthe fieldsby multiplying each of them by a factor e, so that e
does not appear in the covariant derivatives:

                                                                   (29.5.2)
                                           BC

                 (DpXJA = d^A + 22 6ABC vb^c         9             (29.5.3)
                                BC

                                                                   (29.5.4)
                                           BC

                             —
                fA^v = d\iVav dv Vau + 22 6ABC Vbv Vcv             (29.5.5)
                                       BC
and the potential is


                K(0, 0*) = 2 J2 E €abc Re 0B Im 0C                 (29.5.6)
                              A iBC                J
This potential takes the value zero for a family of scalarfieldexpectation
values,which (up to a gauge transformation) may be parameterized as
                           = d>7= 0             03 = a             (29.5.7)
with a a complex parameter, known as the vacuum modulus. This vacuum
expectation value gives masses 2\a\ to the vector fieldsV\^ and J^, the
gauginos X\ and A2, the chiralfermions ipiand xp29and the scalars0i and
02, leaving V^, A3,1/^3, and 03 = a allmassless.
  Taking   account  only of these zero-mass modes (and dropping the
       3), the tree approximation gives the effectivelow-energy theory as
subscript
simply the free-field theory with Lagrangian density

       ^eff =      -(dpaY(d*a)-±(m9vJ)

                                                              pa
                -\f,-r-Wm)\+1^.                         rf
                                                    ~-\ivpo        (29.5.8)

with /j!V= d^Vv — dvV^ Indeed, any renormalizable theory of a single
gauge boson and itsgauge-neutral N = 2 superpartners must be a free-
fieldtheory,because N = 2 supersymmetry does not allow a superpotential
for this theory.
                       29.5 The Seiberg-Witten Solution                            289

  But thisisnot the whole story.In integratingout the massive degrees of
freedom in this theory,quantum corrections produce non-renormalizable
interactionterms in the low-energy effectivefieldtheory. We can classify
the interactionsand Feynman diagrams containing them that predominate
at low energy by the same sort of counting of powers of energy that
we used in dealing with low-momentum     pions and nucleons in Section
19.5. When we use the effectiveLagrangian perturbatively to calculate
low-energy scattering amplitudes, the number v of powers of energy
contributed by a connected graph with L loops, // external fermion lines,
lb internalboson (a or V^) lines,Ia internal auxiliaryfieldlines,and V\
verticesof each type i,is
                          v = 4L + Y, Vidi~ 2Ih - If ,                         (29.5.9)
                                    i
where di isthe number of derivativesin the interactionof type i.(Internal
auxiliaryfieldlinesdo not contribute in Eq. (29.5.9)because their
      are independent of momentum.) These quantitiesare subject to the
propagators
topological relations
                          L = Ib +If +Ia - J2 Vt■+ 1 ,                        (29.5.10)
                                            i
and

 2Ib+Eb = Y       Vibt,    2If+Ef
                                    =
                                        Y       Vifi>   2Ia+Ea = £       *ta , (29.5.11)
              i                             i                        i
where £&, £/, and Ea are the numbers of external boson, fermion, and
auxiliaryfieldlines,and bu fu and a\ are the numbers of boson, fermion,
and auxiliaryfieldsin interactionsof type I We can therefore write the
number of powers of energy as
       v = !>,(*+          tfi + at-2) + 2L-Ef-2Ea                + 2.        (29.5.12)
            i
According to Eqs. (26.8.4)and (27.4.42),both the D-term of a function
of left-chiralscalar N = 1 superfieldsand their adjoints and the J^-term
of a pair of N = 1 gauge superfieldsWa times an arbitrary function of
N = 1 left-chiral scalarsuperfieldshave d,-+ \ft+at = 2, while adding any
additional Wa factorsor superderivatives2)^ would give d,+ \ft+at > 2, so
in our case supersymmetry rulesout any interactionswith di+ \fi+ ciiless
than 2. The dominant contribution to low-energy scatteringamplitudes is
thus given by the tree approximation (L = 0),calculatedwith an effective
Lagrangian containing only terms with di + \fi + a* = 2, which takes the
general form discussed in Section 27.4:

      ifeff=                      - ^Re                              .        (29.5.13)
                  ^[K(<D,<D*)]D                 [r(<D)(wleWL)]^
290                      29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

Eq. (27.4.42)then gives the Lagrangian in terms of component               fieldsas

        d2K(a,a')       - x                ~
 se =                         (W #v) + \&\2 dn<*dV
          da da*


            ■"•{^?(^K}-5-{^S?(«^)*-}
          ld4K(a,a*)^
        + T
          4 d2ad2a r(wi)           (wr)


        +4J«-{(^)W^}-^{(^)'^}

        +                                         -
            Re|r(a)[-         ^(A^(l -y5)A)           ^v/"v
                           1
                         i 0 *^jxvpa] J       i


                                                      +                .    (29.5.14)
        +^Re       {^          [-(Wv>l)/„v                2*(JVl)d]}
  In order to implement N = 2 supersymmetry, we now want to impose
invariance under the discrete^-symmetry transformation (27.9.2):

                               tp^>X,             X^-xp,                    (29.5.15)
with a and V^ unchanged. The condition that the coefficientsof (\pflip)
and (I $A) should be equal is

                                             = Rer<a).                      (29.5.16)
                                 -J^
The right-hand side isthe sum of a function of a and a function of a*, so
d4K/d2ad2a* = 0, and thereforethe term quartic in xp9which would have
had no counterpart for A, is absent. By an integrationby parts,the term
±Re{7»(I     py$X)} may be replaced with -|Re{(Iy^y5^)^T(a)}.        The
condition that the coefficientsof (vy^sV) and (ly^ysA) should be equal is
then satisfiedif
                                 1a ^   1 d3K             a
                                      =
                                 45"T   2 3W^'
which is also an automatic consequence of Eq. (29.5.16).According to
Eq. (26.A.7),the terms proportional to f inQfy11,yv\y>)and /^(^[y^^lysvO
are automatically invariant_under the transformation (29.5.15),as are also
the terms proportional to (I^lHwl)    and itsadjoint.On the other hand,
the invariance of the terms proportional to (X\p)D and (Xys\p)D requires
                    29.5 The Seiberg-Witten Solution                   291

that we extend the transformation (29.5.15)so that

                                D^-D,                             (29.5.17)
which also leavesthe term \D2 invariant.Finally,Eq. (29.5.16)tellsus that
the coefficientsof (\p\pL)^* and (I^l)^ are equal, so the transformation
(29.5.15)must  also be extended so that
                                & -+ &* ,                         (29.5.18)
which also leavesthe term l^l2 invariant.We conclude then that the
condition
       (29.5.16)ensures that the whole action derived from Eq. (29.5.14)
is invariant under the combined transformation (29.5.15),(29.5.17),and
(29.5.18).Since the Lagrangian is invariant under N = 1 supersymmetry
with a left-chiral scalar supermultiplet (a,xp9IF) and a gauge supermul-
tiplet(V^  K  D)9 itis also invariant under a second supersymmetry with
a left-chiralscalar supermultiplet (a,A, &*) and a gauge supermultiplet
(Vn, —y, —D). Eq. (29.5.16)is therefore enough to ensure that the action
obtained from Eq. (29.5.13)or (29.5.14)isinvariant (without imposing the
fieldequations) under N = 2 supersymmetry.
  The general solution of Eq. (29.5.16)can be expressed as**
       rri/.   1 dh(a)           __. ,x _   (a*h(a))        ,™*.«,*x
                                 «<»•<■>=ta           •     (29'519)
       rw-snr-                              {^7
with ft a function of a alone. In terms of ft,the Lagrangian density
(29.5.14)now reads


                  £]   [-\(w    m-ys)v>)-\$*(i-ts)a)




This is invariant under an SU(2) ^-symmetry, under which (xp9X)
      as a doublet and (Im 3F9 Re J^, D/y/2) as a triplet.The discrete
transforms

**The factor
           l/4niisincludedinorderto simplify
                                           theduality
                                                    transformation
                                                                 introduced
  below.Seibergand Wittenintroduceda function3F(a)(notrelated
                                                            to the auxiliary
  field                         forwhich h(a)= d!F(a)/da.
      !F\ known astheprepotential,
292                     29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

transformation (29.5.15),(29.5.17),and (29.5.18)is a finiteelement of this
SU(2) group: a rotation of n radians around the 2-axis.
  Comparing Eqs. (29.5.8)and (29.5.20),we see that in the tree
approximation

                              M^Otree=                  a.                (29.5.21)

The achievement of Seiberg and Witten was to calculateh(a) exactly.
  The firststep in thiscalculationis to recognize that there are various
lineartransformations on a and dh(a)/da that give physicallyequivalent
theories. This is because of a remarkable property of the low-energy
effectivetheory, relatedto the dualityproperty discussed brieflyin Section
27.9.To demonstrate thisproperty, letus return to the Lagrangian density
(29.5.13)expressed in terms of N = 1 superfields,now using the relations
(29.5.19)required by N = 2 supersymmetry

      ifeff=                    -                                     .   (29.5.22)
               ^Im    [&h(<S>)]D ^Im           [tf(<D)
                                                     (wleWL)]^
In path integrals the spinor field-strengthsuperfield Wl is constrained
by the supersymmetric extension (27.2.20)of the homogeneous Maxwell
equations:

                                Re               = 0.                     (29.5.23)
                                     (®leWL)
This is usually imposed by requiring that Wl take the form (27.2.15)


                              WL=l-(®\e®R)®LV,                            (29.5.24)

where V is an unrestrictedreal superfield. Instead, we can implement
the condition (29.5.23)by introducing a Lagrange multiplierterm in the
action

                     A/eff=                    [V (@IeWL)]D       ,       (29.5.25)
                              ^Re      Jd4x
where V is an unrestrictedreal superfield.(The numerical factor 1/87T
serves to fix the normalization of V in a way we shall find convenient
later.) Then in path integrals we can integrate over both V and Wl,
with no restrictionson either except that V is a real superfieldand Wl
is a left-handed spinor superfield satisfyingthe left-chiralitycondition
          = 0. Integrating by parts in superspace allows us to write the
^RoWlp
new term in the action as

             A/eff= -                    [{[2LV)TeWL)\D       ,           (29.5.26)
                        ^Re     Jd4x
                        29.5 The Seiberg-Witten Solution                             293

or, using Eq. (26.3.31)and the fact that WL is left-chiral,

             A/eff= Re                         [(wleWL)]           ,             (29.5.27)
                            [^     jd4x                       J
where Wl is defined in terms of V by the same relationthat previously
gave Wl in terms of V:

                                                              .                  (29.5.28)
                               WL=lj(9le2R)2LV
But now we are integrating over Wl                with no such constraint,with an
action that is quadratic in Wl
                                      1 .,.-./.„t ,„\    1
   /eff+ A/eff= Im                      tf(<D)(w£*WL) -
                        Jd4X      [-—                   ^ (^L^l)J

                    ~Im
                   + 7           /Vx                   •                         (29.5.29)
                                         [**&(*)]
This integrationisdone by settingWl equal to the value where the action
is stationaryin Wl :

                                                  WL
                                       WL—U.                                     (29.5.30)
                                                 h'{<S>)
and the whole effectiveaction becomes
           1 „     f,       f 1
 /eff= +
           -Im/^            [_          (wIeWL)]^-lnjd\[Vhm]D.
                                                              (29.5.31)
Now, ifwe define a new left-chiral
                                 scalar superfieldand a new h function
                          ^ = h(d>),              ft(6)= -0,                     (29.5.32)
then
                            dh dh              d<S>d® _
                                                                                 (29.5.33)
                            dd> d<S>           dd> d<S>
so the action (29.5.31)may be written as

  Jeff= - -Urn              [h'm       (wleWL)}^
                                                           + -Um
                                                             [&k*)]D
                                                                        .  d4x
                   jd4x                                                J
                                                                  (29.5.34)
From the method by which we have derived it,we know that the theory
based on this effectiveaction is equivalent to the original effectivefield
theory, so the N = 2 effective field theory with scalarfield value a and h
function h(a) is physicallyequivalent to one with scalarfield value^ ao =


  The subscript
             D standsfor'dual,'
                             and ofcoursehas nothingtodo withtheD-termof
  a superfield.
294                  29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

h(a) and h function h(ao) = —a. This is the version of duality that applies
in the present context.
  There is another transformation of the function h(Q>) that also yields
an equivalent Lagrangian (now with no change in 0 or W) and can
be combined with the transformation (29.5.32)to give a larger group of
duality transformations. Suppose we shifth(Q>)by a linear term with a
realcoefficient:

                           h(®)^h(<!>) + b<t>,                   (29.5.35)
where b isa realconstant. Then the firstterm in the effectiveLagrangian
density (29.5.22)is shiftedby bIm{[Q}*Q}]D}/8n, which vanishes since the
D-term of 0*0 is real. The change in the effectiveLagrangian density
(29.5.22)is therefore given by the shiftin the second term

                  ^eff - ^eff -    b_                  ,         (29.5.36)
                                  ^-Im   [(w^l)]^
or, according to Eq. (27.2.13),


                            i{l^sX)+-e^f,vfp J^Jpa\              (29.5.37)
        ^eff-^eff-87r                   4e
The firstterm in the brackets on the right-hand side is a spacetime
derivative,and therefore does not affect the effectiveaction. The
     term in the brackets can also be written as a spacetime derivative
second
                                                        —
(\/2)d^(e^pGAvfpG) wherever /MV can be written as d^Av 3VAM. However,
as discussed in Section 23.3,the gauge transformation that we used to put
(/>ain the 3-directionmust be singular somewhere, so we cannot write f^v
everywhere in terms of a single A^. In consequence, physical quantities
can be affectedby a term in the action of the form

                                                                 (29.5.38)
                        -J^Jd4x^Vp<7Uvfp«-
In particular,Witten11 has shown that, in the theory of magnetic mono-
poles described in Section 23.3,the electriccharge of a magnetic monopole
with minimum monopole moment in the presence of such a term is e6/2n.
But, as mentioned in Section 27.9, in this theory there are also dyons,
particleswith both magnetic monopole moments and charges given by
any integer multiple of e, so the whole pattern of monopole and dyon
charges isperiodic in 6 with period 2n. In fact,allphysical quantitieshave
thisperiodicity,because the 6 of the low-energy effectivetheory isinherited
from the 6 appearing in the Lagrangian density (29.5.1)of the underlying
theory (note Eq. (29.5.21)),and we have seen in Section 23.5 that all
physical quantitiesare periodic in this 6. According to Eq. (29.5.37),the
transformation (29.5.35)changes 6 by 2nb, and thereforewith b equal to
                       29.5 The Seiberg-Witten Solution                      295

an arbitrarypositive or negative integer it yields an equivalent effective
action.
  This sort of transformation is closely related to an exact invariance
of the underlying theory. The Lagrangian (29.5.1)is invariant under a
continuous R-symmetry, under which

  0L ~+ exp(ia)0L ,        WAL -+ exp(ia)W^L ,       ®A -+ exp(2ia)0,i. (29.5.39)

This symmetry is broken by an anomaly: both XAl and \pAL have R
quantum numbers +1, and of course XAr and \pAR have R quantum
numbers —1, so according to Eqs. (23.5.21)and (23.5.23),the measure in
the integralover fermion fieldschanges under the transformation (29.5.39)
by a factor exp(2faiVv),where v is an integer,the winding number of the
vector fieldconfiguration,and N isdefined by

                               Tr (tAtB)=              •
                                             ^NdAB
(The factor exp(2iaiVv) is the same as given in Section 23.5,even though
here we have two fields\pA and XA in the same representationof the gauge
group, because these are Majorana fields,in contrast with the Dirac
fieldsused in Section 23.5.)The generators here are (tA)BC = —*^4BC, so
N = 4, and therefore the measure remains invariant when exp(8ia) = 1.
In other words, the continuous R-symmetry is broken by instantons to a
Zg subgroup, generated by the transformation

        Wal -► \fiy>AL,         ^al -► V^l     ,     <I>a-> i<i>A•      (29.5.40)
This symmetry then must carry over to the effectivelow-energy theory.
However, it does not tellus that the effectiveLagrangian (29.5.20)is
invariantunder the discretetransformation (29.5.40),which would require
that —ih(ia) = h(a) for all a. This condition is satisfiedby the tree
approximation (29.5.21),but (as we will see) it is violated even in one-
loop order. The Zg K-symmetry is realizedin the effectivetheory by the
condition that the effectivetheory with h function —ih(ia) is equivalent
to one with h function h(a). That is,—ih(ia) must be related to h(a) by
some combination of the transformations (29.5.32)and (29.5.35),with b
an integer.
  We have seen that the physical significanceof the theory is left
unchangedby two sortsof transformation: the transformation 0 —► <X>= h(Q>)
and h(Q>)—► h(<f>)= — O, which can be written as


                                       -.                      •        <—
                      (A       M             J)      (m)
and the transformations h(Q>)—► h(Q>)+ 60, 0 —► O, which can be written
296                  29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

as

                                 -                              •   <*"»
                    ( A      )       ( I   ! ) ( MO,        )
where b is an arbitraryinteger.By combining these transformations, we
can make generalized duality transformations

                                                                    <—
                   U,M-)U).
where n, m, fc,and / are any integers satisfyingthe condition that the
matrix in Eq. (29.5.43)should, like those in Eqs. (29.5.41)and (29.5.42),
have unit determinant:
                                 nl-mk     = \.                     (29.5.44)
These transformations thereforeform the group SL(2, Z).
  The physical significanceof the duality transformation can be brought
forward by considering the central charge of the N = 2 supersymmetry
algebra. As shown in Section 25.5,the eigenvalue Zn of thiscentralcharge
in any one-particle state sets a lower bound M > \Zn\/2 on the mass
of the state,a bound that is reached for particlesthat belong to 'short'
supermultiplets.We saw in Section 27.9 that Zn is given in the underlying
SU(2) gauge theory with N = 2 supersymmetry by Eq. (27.9.22):
                           Zi2 = 2y/2v[iq-Jf],
where q and M are the charge and magnetic moment of the particle,and v
isthe vacuum expectation value of the conventionally normalized neutral
scalarfield.In the notation used in the present section,we have absorbed
a factor e into the normalization of the fielda, so here we have

                         Zn = 2^2 a [iq- Jt]/e .                 (29.5.45)
This theory contains particleslikethe massive elementary scalars,spinors,
and vector bosons, which have charge e and zero magnetic monopole
moment, so such particlesare eigenstatesof Zn with eigenvalue
                               elementary
                                        = 2j2ia.
                       ^charged                                 (29.5.46)
As we have seen, the theory with scalar fielda and h function h(a) is
equivalent to one with scalarfieldna + mh(a) and h function ka + lh(a).
Therefore for all integers n and m the theory with scalar fielda and h
function h(a) must also contain a particlethat looks likea massive particle
of charge e and zero magnetic moment in the version of the theory with
scalarfieldna + mh(a) and h function ka + lh(a\ and that thereforehas a
central charge

                          Zn = 272i\na     +
                                               mh{a)]
                                                        .           (29.5.47)
                    29.5 The Seiberg-Witten Solution                  297

Comparing this with Eq. (29.5.45),we see that, in the version of this
theory with scalarfielda and h function h(a\ this particleappears as one
with a charge q and a magnetic monopole moment Jt given by

    q/e = n + mRe[h(a)/a] ,              Jf/e = mIm[h(a)/a] .    (29.5.48)

This is a dyon, with both charge and magnetic monopole moment. Note
that the formula (29.5.48)for the charge of thisparticlebears out Witten's
earlierresultabout the charge of magnetic monopoles: adding a term ba
to the function h(a) changes the charge of a monopole with m = 1 by an
amount be = eA0/2n.
   Using the tree-approximation result (29.5.21)for h(a) in Eq. (29.5.48)
shows that in this approximation the magnetic monopole moments in
this theory are multiples of a value 4n/e. This is the same as the
      monopole moment derived in Section 23.3 (recallthat the magnetic
magnetic
monopole moment g used there is Jt/4n\ but thisis a semi-classical
     subject to quantum corrections.Note that the duality transformation
result,
(29.5.41)with n = 0 and m = 1 takes an elementary particlewith charge e
and magnetic monopole moment zero into a non-elementary particlewith
magnetic monopole moment Im [h(a)/a],which in the tree approximation
is An/e.
   The beta function for the electriccharge in the underlying N = 2
supersymmetric SU(2) gauge theory is given perturbativelyby the one-
loop result Eq. (27.9.50),with the firstCasimir invariant taken now as
C\ = 2e and the number of hypermultiplets set at H = 0:

                                               e3
                                         =              •        (29.5.49)
                         iWbative(e)         -4^2

We here take a as the renormalization scale,so the running charge e(a)
satisfies

                                    =               .            (29.5.50)
                          a-^e(a)       p(e(a))

Using the perturbation theory formula (29.5.49),this gives

                                    =
                    [e"2(fl)]perturbative ln                >    (29.5.51)
                                       ^2    \JJ

where A is an integration constant. In the formalism we are adopting
here, with a factor e absorbed into the definitionof the gauge field,the
quantity e~2(a) appears as the coefficienth'(a)/4ni of the term — \f^vf^v
in the low-energy effectiveLagrangian (29.5.20),so the function h(a) is
298                    29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

given in perturbation theory by^
               = —                          ^^                     ~
 [M«)]perturbative       aln(x)~H=                 [*~2(fl)]perturbative
                                                                     y^2
                                                                 (29.5.52)
This is a good approximation* for sufficiently large values of \a\9where
Eq. (29.5.51)gives a small value of e(a). In this case, Eq. (29.5.48)gives
the magnetic monopole moment of monopoles and dyons as
                                  -2               *
                     =
       ^perturbative/e 4 7Tm fl [e (fl)Jperturbative
                                                  ~^~2                 (29.5.53)

where m isan arbitraryinteger.Note that thisisnot the same as would be
found by simply replacing e with the running charge e(a) on the right-hand
side of the semi-classicalformula Jt/e = 4nm/e2.
  For sufficiently large values of \a\9Eq. (29.5.52)also satisfies
                                                                 a necessary
consistency condition: the coefficientImh'(a)/4n     of the kinematic terms
—                                and  —          must  be positive.The same
  \(\p9\p\ —\Q>   QA), —d^a*d^a          \f^vf^v
condition tellsus also that Eq. (29.5.52)cannot be a good approximation
for all values of a, because it gives a negative value for \mh!(a) for \a\
sufficientlysmall.
  Eq. (29.5.52)shows that ifa iscarried counterclockwise around a circle
with a large value of |a|,where perturbation theory is valid,then h(a) is
shiftedby —4a. This tellsus that h(a) must have one or more singularities
at finitevalues of a.
  We can easilyrule out the possibilitythat h(a) has just one singularity,
because thiswould make it impossible to satisfythe condition that h\a)
should have a positive imaginary part for all non-singular values of a,
which as we have seen is necessary for the positivityof the coefficients
of the kinematic terms in the effectiveLagrangian. A single singularity
would have to be at a = 0, because the 1L%-symmetry tellsus that ifh(a) is
singular at a then itisalso singular at ia.The function h(a)— ftperturbative(
would then be analytic except at infinityand perhaps at a = 0, but this
function vanishes as \a\—► oo, and in particular does not change when
carried around a circleat large a, so it could at most be a polynomial
in 1/a, with no constant term. If the polynomial does not vanish, then
h\a) goes as some negative power of a as a —► 0, which would not

+tThe additive  constantneeded in integrating h'(a)has no effecton the low-energy
                                         because[0*]disa derivative.
           actionderivedfrom Eq.(29.5.22),
   effective                                                        Thisconstant
   can be fixedby referenceto theZ8-symmetrydiscussed  earlier.
                                                             Eq. (29.5.52)satisfies
   —ih(ia)= h(a)— l,whichisa specialcasewithb = — 1 ofthetransformations (29.5.35)
   thatleavethe physical           of the theoryunchanged.Thiswould not be the
                        significance
   caseifwe had added a constant o Eq.(29.5.52).
 * Therearenon-perturbative contributions12to fi(e),
                                                  arisingfrom instantons,
                                                                        but these
   vanishrapidlyfore —► 0.
                     29.5 The Seiberg-Witten Solution                   299

have a positiveimaginary part, while if the polynomial did vanish then
h\a) would be equal to ftperturbative(a)>
                                       which also does not have positive
imaginary part for a —► 0.
  In studying the singularitystructureof h(a\ itis helpful to keep track of
dualityby treatinga and ap = h(a) in the same way, expressing them both
as functions of some complex variable u. Seiberg and Witten took u to
be the expectation value of the gauge-invariant quantity \ J2A c^a^a- This
changes sign under the 1L% transformations </>a—► +i<t>A>and of course
under thistransformation a = <fo—► ±ia9 so

                                a(-u) = ±ia(u).                  (29.5.54)

The sign here has no physical significancebecause a and —a are related
by a finiteSU(2) gauge transformation. (Where necessary itcan be made
definiteby adopting the convention that the upper and lower signs apply
if Re u > 0 or Re u < 0, respectively.)We can trust perturbation theory
for large values of \a\9so for \u\—► oo

              2u ,        do —► -                    —
                                    yjlu In ( —^ j       2^j2u   (29.5.55)
                                n
Note that when u istaken counterclockwise around a circleat a fixed large
value of |w|,the logarithm ln(2u/A2) is shiftedby 2in, while yjlu changes
sign,so the changes in a and ao are given by a monodromy matrix:

                                                             •   <**»
                     (;     H       i'   -°.)     (;)
The functions a(u) and a/>(w)must therefore have two or more
singularities
        at finitevalues un of u, such that the combined effectof going
counterclockwise around each singularityisthe same as (29.5.56).
  Let us consider the possibilitythat there are just two singularities.
                                                                     (This
was shown to be the case in the second Seiberg-Witten paper of Reference
10.) Under the Zg-symmetry that takes aA —► wu we have u —► — u, so
the singularitiesmust be at a pair of u values t*oand — t*o-Going from
a non-singular base point P in the u plane counterclockwise around the
singularityat ±uo allthe way back to P should yield an equivalent theory.
Therefore it must take the form of a duality transformation, in general
depending on P, in which the vector (a,ao) is multiplied with an SL(2,Z)
monodromy matrix M+, as in Eq. (29.5.43).The counterclockwise contour
around the circlewith fixed large u can be deformed into a contour that
startsat P and goes counterclockwise back to P around — t*oand then
counterclockwise back to P around +t*o- (See Figure 29.1.) Since this
deformation cannot change the integral,the product of the monodromy
matrices in thisorder (reading from right to left)must be equal to the
300                  29 Beyond Perturbation Theory




Figure 29.1. Deformation of a contour thatcircles the complex u plane
          at large \u\into a contour that startsat a base point P, circlesthe
counterclockwise
singularityatu = — wo counterclockwiseback to P, and then circles
                                                                the singularity
at u = +wo counterclockwiseback to P.


matrix in Eq. (29.5.56):

                                            *
                     M+M-    = Moo s                                (29.5.57)
                                       (        _°j )

Singularitiesoccur when a and a/> take values at which some particle
has zero mass. For instance,the singularityat a = 0 in the perturbative
formula (29.5.52)for h(a) occurs because this is the value of a at which
elementary charged particlesbecome massless in perturbation theory. We
have already ruled out the possibilityof a singlesingularityat a = 0, so
the singularities
                at +t*o must arisefrom the vanishing of the mass of some
other particles.
  The most striking part of the Seiberg-Witten calculation was their
realizationthat these particlesare among the non-elementary magnetic
monopoles or dyons found in the underlying S (7(2)supersymmetric theory.
Semi-classicalcalculationsof the sort done in Section 23.3 show that the
stablemonopoles and dyons have magnetic quantum number m = +1 and
any integer electricquantum number n, and belong to hypermultiplets,
each consisting of a pair of Majorana spinors and a pair of complex
scalars.These are 'short'multiplets,with a mass given by the BPS value,
which according to Eqs. (27.9.24)and (29.5.47)is

                     M = |Z12|/2= y/2\ Na + h{a)                    (29.5.58)

where N = +n. The easiestway to calculatewhat happens when thismass
goes to zero is to consider the more familiar problem of what happens
when the mass of a hypermultiplet of ordinary charged particlesgoes to
zero, and then use duality to switch to the case of a lightmonopole. The
                       29.5 The Seiberg-Witten Solution                        301

beta function for the 1/(1)gauge coupling is given here by Eq. (27.9.45)
with C\ = 0, Cf2 = C\ = 2, so

                                   «<> =             ■
                                           +&
The solution of the renormalization group equation is then

                    e-2ia) = __Lln(_?_).
                               An2    \ constant/
As we saw in deriving Eq. (29.5.52),this gives

                  ti{a)= An ie~2(a) = - - In (—^
                    v                                  ^ .
                                        n    V constant/
Because thisgives a value of e2(a)that is positiveand small for a —► 0, this
would be a reliableresultifthe theory reallycontained a hypermultiplet of
ordinary charged particleswhose mass goes to zero in thislimit.Instead,
we are assuming that there is a hypermultiplet of monopoles or dyons
whose mass goes to zero; to deal with this case, we can apply the duality
transformation (29.5.43)that takes a into Na + h(a)

                   -               -                                ■   <*«>
        (*,;)          (4)             (-N.     v)        (*<;)
We conclude that when u approaches a point t*owhere a = Na + h(a) —► 0,
we have

                        ^---ln(—M,                                      (29.5.60)
                         da        n          \ constant/
or, in other words,
                         da
                                       + LlJHa)±Nay
                   d(h(a) + Na)          n    \ constant /
The solution is
                                                         + Ng(n)\
        a(u) = a*+l- (h{u) + Na(uj) In                              ^   (29.5.62)
                                       ^W
where ao and Ao are integration constants. We are also assuming that
h + Na —► 0 for w —► wo, so we can write the leading term as

                           h(u) + Na(u) -► c0(u - uo).                  (29.5.63)
Thus Eq. (29.5.62)has the leading term

            m     - ao +           - mo) In          •           (29.5.64)
                             ^(u       (£2^^)
  When we take u counterclockwise allthe way around a circle
    uo there is no change in h(a) + Na, but a is shiftedby — 2(h(a)+ Na),
surrounding
302                        29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

so the monodromy        matrix for this singularityis




  Likewise, ifthe singularityat — wo isassociated with the vanishing mass
of a monopole or dyon with magnetic quantum number +'1 (the prime
distinguishingthis sign from that for wo) and electricquantum number n',
then at this singularityh(u) + N'a(u) —► 0, and

                /     *'/»/ x *r/ / Ai ( v      '^+ ——
                                             h(u)   N'a(u)\
        a^a'0       + - (h(u) +         In I'h(u)+_tfa(uy   I ,       (29.5.66)
                                N'a(u))

where N' = ±'n' and a0 and Aq are new integrationconstants.The leading
terms are

                            h(u) + N'a(u) -> c0(« + mo) ,             (29.5.67)


                     a^4      + i&iu +                                (29.5.68)
                                          U0)j4te^\
The monodromy        matrix for this singularityis


                                       2N>*                           (29-5W)
                           M-=(                   1+2N-J-
It is straightforward then to see that the condition (29.5.57) on these
matrices is satisfiedifand only if
                                      N' = N - 1 .                    (29.5.70)
It makes no differencewhat value we take for N9 because we can shiftit
by an even integer 2M by going around the circleat infinityM times, and
we can shiftit by unity by reflectingu <-*— u. Seiberg and Witten chose
to take N = 0, so that N' = —1. Then for u —► no

                           h(u) -► c0(u - no),                  (29.5.71)

                      a(u) ^a0    +           - no) In            ,   (29.5.72)
                                      l-^(u              (^-j^)
and for n —► —no

                              h(u) - a(u) -► c'0(u+ n0),              (29.5.73)


                      fl(K)- «o +             + uo) In            .   (29.5.74)
                                  ^(u                    (!^)
  We now impose the unbroken ZVsymmetry         condition (29.5.54).We can
calculatea(u) for u —► —no by writing itas — ia(—u) and using Eq. (29.5.72).
                      29.5 The Seiberg-Witten Solution                         303

Then for w —► — wo

                     a(u) —► —iao H           In        r          .       (29.5.75)
                                          n        \    Ao     /
Comparing thiswith Eq. (29.5.74),we see that c'0= ico, so Eq. (29.5.73)
becomes, for w —► —wo,

                           /i(w)- a(w) -► ico (w + w0).                    (29.5.76)
  The fielda isdefined to include a factor of the gauge coupling e, which
can be given any value by an appropriate choice of the renormalization
point at which e is evaluated. Seiberg and Witten chose to define the
scale of a and w (keeping w = a2/2 at infinity)so that wo = 1; that is,
the singularitiesare at u = +1. With this convention, they obtained the
solutions (defined in the complex plane cut from —1 to +1)


                        flsw(u)= —   f dx J^—^     >                       {29.5.11)
                                  n J-\   V 1 — xL


                       fcsw(w)= ^              /" dx J-^-T— •              <29-5-78>
                                      n       J\     V xL 1
The mathematical methods originally used to obtain these resultsare
beyond the scope of this book, but fortunately itis not difficult
                                                                afterthe
fact to check that they are correct.
  First,we can check that flsw(w) and /isw(w) have a singular behavior
near w = +1 of the same form (29.5.71),(29.5.72),(29.5.75),and (29.5.76)
as the true solution.For u -> 1, Eq. (29.5.77)gives

                      y/2 r1    dx              u-1     r1
         0sw(w)
                       n J-\ Jx
                             T^TT+ 1               2n
                                                   2%   J-x 7(l-x)(w-x)
                                                        7-i
                       4   w— 1 t (       u— 1                         \
                         + -^— In
                      V^    2tt   V3 + w-2V2VTT^y



Also, Eq. (29.5.78)gives
                               *' fu i lu — x                              ^A . om
                  fcsw(w)-+-      I dx J —    = i{u—\)                 .   (29.5.80)
                               7T71    V X  1      20
Eqs. (29.5.79)and (29.5.80)agree with our previous results(29.5.71)and
(29.5.72),with c0 = i and a0 = 4/Jn. Eq. (29.5.77) satisfiesthe Z8
reflectionproperty (29.5.54),so asw(w) automatically has the behavior
(29.5.75)for w -> — 1, and (with due regard to the signs of square roots
dictated by the cut from w = —ltow      = +l)it follows directly from
304                    29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

Eqs. (29.5.77)and (29.5.78)that /isw(w)— flsw(w)is proportional to u + 1
for u near —1.
  Now since asw(w) and /isw(w) have the same singularitystructure at
u -> +1 as a(u) and h(u\ they have the same monodromy     (Eqs. (29.5.59)
and (29.5.69)with N = 0 and N' = — 1): as u circlesthe point +1, we
have


                                         -°i V)              ■   <29-581>
                  (5       H                       (K)
while as w circlesthe point — 1,

                                -                           •    <29-5-82>
                   (Z)                  (2   :>)   (5)
  Let us now consider the quantity
                                     - asw(w)fc(w)•
                    /(u) s a(ii)fcsw(w)                          (29.5.83)
This is an SL(2,Z) invariant,so it has trivialmonodromy:     it returns to
the same value when u circleseither+1 or —1. The only finitesingularities
in a(u),h(u),asw(w), or /isw(w)are the logarithmic singularities
                                                               at +1, but
since f(u) has trivialmonodromy   itdoes not have these singularities,and
itistherefore analytic at allfinitepoints.
  To evaluate the entire function /(w), let'sfirstcheck that the leading
terms in the asymptotic behavior of the functions asw(w) and /isw(w)are
the same as those of a(u) and h(u\ respectively.For u —► oo, Eq. (29.5.77)
gives

                  flswGO - ^              I'          = yJTu ,   (29.5.84)
                                    n    J-i ~P=
                                             Ji
                                                 - x2

while Eq. (29.5.78)gives


          fcswGO - ^           I" -?$=
                                              - ^^\nu       .    (29.5.85)

This isthe same as the leading behavior (29.5.55)of a(u) and h(u).
  This in itselfonly shows that f(u)/u Inu —► 0 for u —► oo.But note that
the reflectionsymmetry (29.5.54)for a(u) and itscounterpart for flsw(w)
tellus that the next-to-leadingterms in both functions are of order ju/u2.
Also, the next-to-leading terms in h(u) and /isw(w) are of order ^Ju. It
follows that we can calculatethe leading term in the asymptotic behavior
of f(u) by settinga(u) = asw(w) = y/2u9 so that f(u) = 0(u) for u —► oo.
Since f(u) is an entire function, this means that f(u) is linear in u. But
f(u) vanishes at u = +1, where h(u) and /isw(w)are 0(u— 1),and f(u) also
vanishes at u = —1, where a(w) — /i(w)and asw(w) — ^sw(w) are 0(w — 1),
                                  Problems                           305

so itmust vanish everywhere. We conclude then that

                                =                                 (29.5.86)
                         aj^
                          a(u)     h-TTV^S(u).
                                     h(u)
Now we must consider the properties of the function g(u).Because /isw(w)
and h(u) are analyticat allfinitepoints except u = — 1,and flsw(w)—^sw(w)
and a(u) — h(u) are analytic at allfinitepoints except u = +1, itfollows
that g(u) (which can also be written as [asw(w) — hsw(u)]/[a(u)— h(u)])is
analyticeverywhere. (There are no zeroes of a(u) or h(u) at u ^ +1, let
alone zeroes of both, because a zero of a(u) or h(u) would be associated
with a point where a charged particleor monopole mass vanishes, which
has been assumed to be not the case for any u ^ +1.) Also, the fact that
the leading terms in the asymptotic behavior for u —► oo of the functions
asw(w) and /isw(w) are the same as those of a(u) and h(u\ respectively,
means that g(u) —► 1 for u —► oo. It follows then that the entirefunction
g(u) must equal unity for allw, and therefore
                      a(u) = aSw(u),    h(u) = hSw(u),          (29.5.87)
as was to be shown.


                                 Problems

  1. What isthe Witten index of the model in Problem 4 of Chapter 26 for
     a ^ 0? For a = 0? Can supersymmetry be broken by higher-order
     effectsin thismodel for a = 0? Explain.

  2. Consider the renormalizable supersymmetric theory with SO(Nc)
     gauge symmetry and Nf left-chiralscalar superfieldsQ>n in the N-
     vector representation. What can you say about the structure of
     the non-perturbative Wilsonian Lagrangian density when the bare
     superpotential vanishes? What if there is a bare superpotential


  3. In the theory with Lagrangian density (29.5.22),what is the relation
     between the component fieldsof the spinor fieldstrength superfield
     Wa and itsdual Wal


                                References

  1. E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B185, 513 (1981). This articleis reprinted
     in Supersymmetry, S. Ferrara, ed. (North Holland/World Scientific,
     Amsterdam/Singapore, 1987).
306                 29 Beyond Perturbation Theory

 la. J. Hughes and J. Polchinski,Nucl. Phys. B278,147 (1986); J. Hughes,
     J. Liu, and J. Polchinski,Phys. Lett. B 180, 370 (1986); J. Bagger
     and A. Galperin, Phys. Lett. B336, 25 (1994); Phys. Rev. D55, 1091
     (1997); Phys. Lett. B412, 296 (1997); L. Antoniadis, H. Partouche,
     and T. R. Taylor, Phys. Lett. B372, 83 (1996); S. Ferrara, L. Gi-
     rardello,and M. Porrati,Phys. Lett. B376, 275 (1996).
  2. E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B202, 253 (1982). This articleis reprinted in
     Supersymmetry, Ref. 1.
  3. A. C. Davis, M. Dine, and N. Seiberg,Phys. Lett. 125B, 487 (1983);
     I.Affleck,M. Dine, and N. Seiberg,Phys. Rev. Lett.51, 1026 (1983);
     Phys. Lett. 137B, 187 (1984), reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 1;
     Nucl. Phys. B241, 493 (1984); Nucl Phys. B52, 1677 (1984); Phys.
     Lett. 140B, 59 (1984).
  4. N. Seiberg,Phys. Lett. B318, 469 (1993).
  5. V. A. Novikov, M. A. Shifman, A. I.Vainshtein, and V. I.Zakharov,
     Nucl. Phys. B229, 381 (1983); Nucl. Phys. B260, 157 (1985); G. C.
     Rossi and G. Veneziano, Phys. Lett. 138B, 195 (1984), reprinted
     in Supersymmetry, Ref. 1; S. F. Cordes, Nucl. Phys. B273, 629
     (1986). For a review, see M. A. Shifman and A. I. Vainshtein,
     hep-th/9902018, to be published.
  6. E. Witten, J. High Energy Phys. 9802, 006 (1998).
  7. V. G. Kac and A. V. Smilga, hep-th/9902029, to be published.
  8. I. Affleck,M. Dine, and N. Seiberg, Nucl. Phys. B256, 557 (1985).
  9. N. Seiberg,Phys. Rev. D49, 6857 (1994).
 10. N. Seiberg and E. Witten, Nucl. Phys. B426, 19 (1994); erratum,
     Nucl. Phys. B430, 485 (1994). The extension to an JV = 2 theory
     with matter hypermultiplets is given by N. Seiberg and E. Witten,
     Nucl. Phys. B431, 484 (1994). For a review, see: K. Intrilligator
                                                                     and
     N. Seiberg, Nucl. Phys. Proc. Suppl. 45BC, 1 (1996); also published
     in Summer School in High Energy Physics and Cosmology, Trieste,
     1995, E. Gava, ed. (World Scientific, Singapore, 1997), and in QCD
     and Beyond: Proceedings of the TheoreticalAdvanced Study Institute
     in Elementary ParticlePhysics, Boulder Colorado, 1995, D. E. Soper,
     ed. (World Scientific,Singapore, 1996).
 11. E. Witten, Phys. Lett. 86B, 283 (1979).
 12. N. Seiberg,Phys. Lett. B206, 75 (1988).
                                  30


                          Supergraphs




The introduction of Feynman graphs in the late 1940s provided the
enormous advantage of preserving manifest Lorentz invariance at every
stage of perturbative calculations.For this purpose itwas necessary that
the exchange of allspin statesof any virtualparticleshould be described
by a singlepropagator. Fortunately, ithas become possible to go a step
further,and develop a supergraph formalism, in which supersymmetry as
well as Lorentz invariance is kept manifest at every stage.1To do so, it
is necessary to describe the exchange of all the particlesdescribed by a
given superfieldby a singlesuperpropagator.
   There isa problem here in that the left-chiral superfields0 over which
we integrate are subject to a differentialconstraint,2rQ> = 0. This is
analogous to the problem in electrodynamics that the field-strengthtensor
is subject to a differential
                           constraint,the homogeneous Maxwell equation.
In electrodynamics this problem is dealt with by expressing the field-
strength tensor in terms of a vector potential,and doing path integrals
over the vector potentialinstead of the fieldstrength tensor.In much the
same way, here we willimpose the left-chiral  constraint by expressing left-
chiralsuperfieldsin terms of potentialsuperfields,over which we integrate
in path integrals. In this formalism we encounter problems like those
produced by gauge invariance in electrodynamics, and deal with them in
much the same way.
   The most important resultto come out of the supergraph formalism
was the non-renormalization theorem for the superpotential.2We have
already proved thistheorem in Section 27.6, using a much easierindirect
technique developed by Seiberg, which can be extended also to describe
non-perturbative effects.Nevertheless, it is interestingto see how these
surprisingcancellationsof renormalization effectsoccur in actual
perturbative
       calculations.




                                   307
308                                30 Supergraphs

                          30.1     Potential Superfields

Consider a theory of left-chiralsuperfieldsOrt(x,6) and their complex
conjugates,but for simplicitywithout gauge superfields.All of the vacuum
expectation values of time-ordered products of component fieldsmay be
calculated from vacuum expectation values of the time-ordered products
of these superfields.We might try to calculatethese from the path-integral
formula

                                              =                            exp (*/[«>])
      /r{*ni(xi,0i), <d„2(x2,02),
                                •••})              /
                                                       HJC,0
                                                                                    (30.1.1)

where / [O] is the action

  im     =                 *»(*> WM*,              + 2 Re       d4x             .   (30.1.2)
             \fd4x[Yl                       0)]d            J         [/((D)]
                                                                            ^

(The factor 1/2 is introduced in the firstterm, as in Eq. (26.4.3),to give
the component fieldsof Oa conventional normalization.) But we cannot
simply read off the supergraph Feynman rules from Eq. (30.1.1),because
the functional integral over the superfields 0>n must be constrained to
satisfythe left-chiralcondition S^RQ>n = 0.
  This is analogous to a similarproblem in electrodynamics. As discussed
in Section 12.3,at energies below the electronmass the interactionsof soft
photons with each other are described by an effectiveaction of the form:


        IU] =           d4x L/"v     + Cl
                                            (/Mv/"v)2
                                                        + c2
                                                                (e^rP")'
                -\j

But we cannot read off the Feynman rules from this formula without
taking into account the fact that the path integral is constrained by the
homogeneous Maxwell equations

                           dfifvp+ dvfPfl+ dpf^ = 0 .
As everyone knows, we deal with this constraint by introducing a four-
vector potential A^ with f^v = d^Av — dvA^ so that the constraint is
                       and integrateover A^(x\ not /MV(x).
automatically satisfied,
  In the same way, we may adopt a trick already used in Section 26.6
to derive the fieldequations for superfields,and introduce a non-chiral
potentialsuperfieldSn(x,0), with

                                    <D„ = 2\Sn ,                                    (30.1.3)
                          30.1 Potential Superfields                                 309

where

                                                                                 (30.1.4)
                                  a/?
so that On automatically satisfies              constraint,^RaO„ = 0. In
                                  the left-chiral
place of Eq. (30.1.1),we then have the path-integralformula

                                        =
    TfOMxi.fli), O„2(x2,02), •})             /                       exp(i/[^S])
                                                     n,x,0
        x^Sn|(xi,6>i)^Sn2(x2,^)--                •                               (30.1.5)

In expressing the action (30.1.2)in terms of Sn, we may recallthat the
D-term of a superderivativedoes not contribute to the action,so we may
shiftthe operator {2>2R)*= 2)2Lacting on S* in the firstterm of Eq. (30.1.2)
to act instead on Sn, which gives


                        Y^K&ASn             + 2 Re         <fx                  . (30.1.6)
 i[®2Rs]=yd4x                                          J         [/(^S)]

The 3>R operator in any one of the factors 3>RS in any term in f{2sRS)
may be taken to act on the whole term, since 2)r gives zero when acting
on any other factor of <2>RSin that term. In this way, we may write

                             f(@2RS) = 92Rf(S),                                  (30.1.7)

where /(S) is obtained from f(2>RS) by omitting any one operator 3)2Rin
each term. For instance,for a singletype of superfield,if/(O) = X)r CrW,
then

                          f(S) = ^crs(92Rsy-1.
                                  r

Using Eqs. (30.1.6),(30.1.7),and (26.3.31),we may put the whole action
in the form of a ZMerm

  /[2>2RS]=                                                       [f(S)]d
                                                                            .    (30.1.8)
              \jd**Y,       ^A]D+2RcJd4x

Eq. (26.6.5)shows that this may also be written as a superspace integral:

            ~                                          - Re fd4x
   I[2\S] =       fd4x     fd46 J2Sn@L@RSn                            fd40f(S).

                                                              (30.1.9)
This is the action we will use in the path-integral derivation of the
supergraph formalism.
310                            30 Supergraphs

                        30.2     Superpropagators

Usually the propagator can be obtained directly from the part of the
action of second order in the fields.If we write this quadratic part for
a complex field </>,(where i is a compound    index including spacetime
coordinates as well as spin and specieslabels)in the form
                                  =                                (3(m)
                        Wfl           -$>u#^'
                                         y
with Dij Hermitian, then as explained in Section 9.4 the propagator is
simply A = D~K The problem with thisariseswhen the quadratic part of
the action isinvariant under a (linearized)gauge transformation

                                *i-*<     + &,                     (30.2.2)
for some classof 'vectors'£. In thiscase we have
                                          = 0,                     (30.2.3)
                                !>,£,
                                 i
and we clearly cannot invert the 'matrix' Dy. In electrodynamics the
problem arisesbecause the Lagrangian density isinvariant under a gauge
transformation A^-* A^ + 3MA. We have this problem here too: since the
action is actually a functional of 3t\Sn and not of Sn itself,
                                                             itis invariant
under the transformation

                              Sn^Sn     + 9RXH9                    (30.2.4)
for any superfieldsXn.
  In the electrodynamics of charged particlesthe problems introduced by
gauge invariance are typicallyhandled by choosing a gauge, for instance
by the Faddeev-Popov-de Witt method described in Section 15.5.But the
problems raised here by invariance under the transformation (30.2.2)are
much more like the problems of the effectivefieldtheory of photons at
energies below the threshold for producing charged particles,where the
theory is gauge-invariant simply because the action only involves gauge-
invariant fields.In such theoriesthere is a simpler option. In addition to
the eigenvector & of Dy with eigenvalue zero (taken for simplicityto be
in a unique direction)we can find a set of orthonormal eigenvectors uvi
with eigenvalues dv ^ 0:
             = dvUvi,                    = <5vv'>           = 0- (30-2-5)
  J2Dijuvj                    XX'Wv'<               XX*&
   J                           i                     i
We can introduce a new set of integrationvariables </>'
                                                      and </>'v:
                            = <l>'t;i
                         <j>i     + Y,<i>>vi-                      (30.2.6)
                              30.2 Superpropagators                           311

The sort of integral encountered in Feynman diagram calculations of
quantum expectation values may then be written

                                     ••• ••• =               / dtf d4>"
     /   Y[d<l>id<j>'exp{j7quad[0]}0a 0J       /


                            exp
                      d<f>'v'
               Y[d<l>'v                                 <^     + J»v
         I                         j-'X>i#i

                        + ^2<l>vuvb
                    <l>'£b                                                 (30.2.7)

where f isthe Jacobian of the transformation (30.2.6).The integralover
   and </>'*
</>'        is of course illdefined, because they do not appear in the
argument of the exponential. But this doesn't matter if the action only
involves gauge-invariant fields,because then </>a9
                                                 fo, etc.willbe contracted
with 'currents'Ja,J&, etc.for which
                                              = o.                         (30.2.8)
                                   ££A

We may thus write Eq. (30.2.7)as

                                           ***      =
         IJ#;#-            exp{i/qiiad[0]}0fl <j>l''' V I II^v^v*
     /


             xexp                          Yl ^vWv       Y     ^Uvb
                    -'£^'v|2}
             + £-terms,                                                    (30.2.9)
where '^-terms'denotes terms proportional to one or more factorsof &,,
£b>etc.,which vanish when contracted with Js satisfyingEq. (30.2.8),and
# isthe infiniteconstant / J d(j)'.
                                 The integralover the </>'v
                                                         then gives

                       •                      ''' ''' OC        ~
     /   Y[ d<t>i
               #           exp{i/qUad[0]}0n      0J       J2 [ iAab]
                                                         pairings
               + £-terms,                                          (30.2.10)
where the sum over pairings is over allways of pairing indiceson the </>s
with indiceson the </>*s,
                       and Aab isthe propagator

                                A^ = ^tw4                                 (30.2.11)

Instead of actuallyevaluating the sum (30.2.11),we can use itsdefining
property that
                                       =
                           J2 ^>acKb       5Z U™ U*b ~ Uab ,              (30.2.12)
312                              30 Super graphs

with II the projection operator on the space orthogonal to £:
                        n2 = n,                    n£   = o.                    (30.2.13)
The solution of Eq. (30.2.12)is unique only up to <!;-terms,but these do
not matter if the fields</>,
                           appear in the action only in gauge-invariant
combinations.
  For instance,in electrodynamics, we can write the kinematic part of the
action as

              =                        =                            "            '
      /quad[A] ~\jd4X           f,vr
                                           +\jd**        ^(D5;          WV)A*
The differentialoperator — D<5* + dvd^ is not invertible,because ithas a
zero eigenvalue with eigenvectors of the form <^ = d^A. The projection
matrix onto the space orthogonal to these vectors is
                                       -                       - y),
                    n/(jc,y) = [V          d^U~l]d\x
where D_1<54(x — y) is any solution of the equation D[D_1<54(x — y)] =
<54(x— y). The defining equation for the propagator is

                            +                      =
                    (-□Sj       d»dx)Ax\x,y)            11/(x,y),
with the solution

                  A/(x, y) = d^ AF(x -y) + d^dv-terms ,
where A^(x — y) is the usual Feynman propagator (6.2.16),satisfying
□Ajr(x — y) = — <54(x— y). (The factor 1/2 in the action does not appear
in the defining equation for the propagator here because A^ is a real
field.The origin of the —ie in the denominator of the Fourier integralin
Eq. (6.2.16)is explained in the path-integralformalism in Section 9.2.)
  Inspection of the firstterm in Eq. (30.1.9)shows that the defining
equation for the superpropagator of the potentialsuperfieldsis
                                             - xf)d\e - ef)dnm,
      -A®12\   Asnm(x,e; x',ef)= &b\x                                           (30.2.14)

where 9 isa superspace differential
                                  operator satisfyingthe conditions for
a projection operator
                         ^2 = ^,              ^*        = 0,  (30.2.15)
        —
and d4(6 0') is the fermionic delta function introduced in Eq. (26.6.8).
The solution is

                                                                                (30.2.16)
                                &=^®2L®2R.
(It is obvious that 0>9R = 0. To check that 0>2 = 0>, we need to
use (26.6.12),which shows that 22R22L22R = -\6U22R.) The solution of
                    30.3 Calculationswith Supergraphs                313

Eq. (30.2.14)is
                                    - x')<54(0- 0')Snm
          A*w(x,0;x',0') = ~^S\x

                         = -AF(x - x')d4(0- 0')Snm + ^R-terms .

                                                                (30.2.17)
  This is the superpropagator for a linecreated by a potentialsuperfield
S^(x\ 0') and destroyed by a potential superfieldS„(x,0), which we must
use in evaluating supergraphs for the action (30.1.9).To make contact
with ordinary propagators, it is also of some interestto consider the
superpropagator of the line created by a left-chiralsuperfieldQ>*m(x\0')
and destroyed by a left-chiral                0). These chiral superfields
                              superfield<J>rt(x,
are obtained by operating on Sn(x,0) with <32R and on S^(x',0') with
Q)'R = <2>'L,so the propagator for the left-chiral
                                                 superfieldsis

                                        - x')d\d - 6')Snm .
         Al(x, 6;x',6')= ±®2R@'2LAF(x                           (30.2.18)

   For instance,the term in the superpropagator of zeroth order in 6 and
6' is



                                                                 (30.2.19)
To evaluate this,we recallEq. (26.6.8)for the fermionic delta function:

     8\e - 0')= 1 ((0L - 0^)T^(0L - efL)){{eR - e'R)Te(eR- e'R)),

from which we find (5/50R)2(5/50^)254(0-0/) = 4. Eq. (30.2.19)therefore
yields
                                 = Af(x - x')dnm ,          (30.2.20)
            [At(x,0;x^0^=^
which is just the usual propagator for the scalar components of the
superfield.


                  30.3   Calculations with Supergraphs

We now consider how to use the resultsof the previous sectionsto
     the quantum effectiveaction T[S,S*] for a set of classicalpotential
calculate
superfieldsSn(x,0) and theiradjoints.Following the prescriptiondiscussed
in Section 16.1,this may be defined in terms of a sum over allconnected
one-particle-irreduciblesupergraphs, consistingof verticesto which are
       directedinternaland externallines.For each externallineof type n
attached
314                         30 Supergraphs

ending or beginning in a vertex labelledx,0, we include a c-number factor
Sn(x,0) or S*(x,0),respectively(but no propagator). A vertex labelledx,0
with N incoming or N outgoing lineslabelledn\9ri2,...,  n^ yieldsa factor
                                           ••
equal to itimes the coefficientof the S1S2   Sn term in the superpotential
f(S) or times the complex conjugate of this coefficient,  respectively.An
internallineof any type coming out of a vertex labelledx, 6 and going into
a vertex labelled x',0' yields a propagator factor,given by Eqs. (30.2.10)
and (30.2.17)as

                       -   l-8\e - 0')AF(x - x').                (30.3.1)

In addition, as shown by Eq. (30.1.7),a superderivative Sf\ acts on the
propagators or external line S-factors of all but one of the internal or
externallinescoming into any vertex,and a superderivative2)2Lacts on the
propagators or external-lineS*-factorsof allbut one of the linescoming
out of any vertex. The product of these factors must be integrated over
allxs and 0s; the quantum effectiveaction is the sum of these integrals
for allone-particle-irreduciblegraphs.
   By integrating by parts in superspace, the Q)2L and/or Sf\ operators
accompanying any one propagator (say,one that connects verticeslabelled
x, 0 and x',0')may be moved to other propagators or external linefactors.
This leaves the factor contributed by this internalline proportional to a
factor <54(0—0').Integratingover 0' then eliminatesthisdelta function,and
letsus replace 0' with 0 everywhere else.(In cases where severalinternal
linesconnect the same pair of vertices,we need to use the property of
fermionic delta functions that [<54(0— 6')]2= 0.) Continuing in this way,
we wind up with a single four-dimensional 0 integral,with all2)s acting
on the external linefactors Sn and S^. That is,though not usually local
in spatialcoordinates,T[S,S*] is localin the fermionic coordinates.
   The structure of this functional is governed by its invariance under
the 'gauge' transformations (30.2.4).This tellsus that every one of the
external line factors Sn or S* must be acted on by an operator Sf\ or
Sf\9 respectively,with two possible exceptions. The exceptions are that
a term with only incoming or only outgoing external lines,in which all
but one of the external linefactors Sn or S* are acted on by Q)\ or 2)2L,
respectively,and by no other superderivatives,is stillinvariant under the
transformation (30.2.4),even though it cannot be expressed as a four-
dimensional 0-integralof a functional only of the Ort and/or O* alone.
This isbecause the change in such an amplitude under thistransformation
could only come from the change in the externallinefactor Sn or S* that is
not acted on by an operator 2)\ or 2)2L,and thischange iseliminated ifwe
use integrationby parts to move one of the other 2)2Kor Q)2Loperators to
act on it.As we saw in Section 30.1,such a term in T[S,S*] isthe ^-term
                     30.3 Calculationswith Supergraphs              315

of a functionalof the Q>n or of the O*, and thus makes a correctionto the
superpotential or to itscomplex conjugate. Aside from these exceptions,
every term in T[S,S*] may be written as a four-dimensional 0-integralof
a functional only of the Q>n and/or O*, and thereforemakes a correction
to the D-term part of the effectiveaction.
  Also note that a term in the quantum effectiveaction in which allbut one
of the externallinefactorsSn or S* isacted on by 2)2Kor Q)2L,respectively,
and also by additional Q}\ or 2)2Loperators (such as in combinations like
22R22L22RSn or 92L92R92LS*n)may also be written by integrationby parts
as a term in which one of the extra 2)2K or 2)2Lacts on the previously
undifferentiatedexternal line Sn or S* factor.Such a term may therefore
be expressed as a four-dimensional ^-integralof a functional only of the
Ort and/or O*, and thereforejust makes another correction to the D-term
part of the action. The only terms in T[S,S*] that cannot be written in
this way are those that have E incoming external linesand only E — 1
operators 2)2Koperating on the Sn external line factors,or £* incoming
external linesand only E* — 1 operators 2)2Loperating on the S* external
line factors. We can therefore tellwhether a supergraph can make a
contribution to the superpotential or its adjoint by simply counting the
number of Q)2K or Sf\ operators contributed by the supergraph to the
corresponding term in T[S,S*].
  Let us count these superderivatives.Consider a connected graph with:
Vn verticeswith n linescoming in; V* verticeswith n lines going out; /
internallines;E external incoming lines;and £* external outgoing lines.
These numbers are related by

              / +E    =           ,     / + £* = 5>K;       .    (30.3.2)
                          Y^nVn
                           n                      n
The totalnumbers of 3>2Rand Q)2Loperators are then

      NR = ^ Vn(n - 1) = / + E - V = L + F* + E - 1 ,            (30.3.3)
            n
and

      NL = J2 K(n -l) = I+Em-V           = L+V    + Em-l,        (30.3.4)
            n
where V = ^2nVn is the total number of verticeswith incoming lines;
V* = Y,n Vn is ^e total number of verticeswith outgoing lines; and
L = I — V—V*    + 1 isthe number of loops. We see that a graph with any
loops willhave Nr > E and Nl > £*, so that there are at leastenough
Q)\ operators to convert all Sn into Q>n = 2>2RSnand itsderivatives,and
enough Q)2Loperators to convert allS* into O* = @>2LS*and itsderivatives.
Any graph with loops thus yieldsonly a contributionto thefour-dimensional
316                          30 Supergraphs

6-integral— in other words the D-term — of a functional of the left-chiral
superfields<S>nand theiradjoints.
  The only way to obtain a contribution to an ^-term or its adjoint is
to have just Nr = E — 1 operators Q}\ or just Nl = E* — 1 operators 2}2L,
respectively.According to Eqs. (30.3.3)and (30.3.4),such a graph would
have L = 0 and V* = 0 or V = 0, respectively.In other words, since we
are considering only one-particle-irreduciblegraphs, we can only get an
^-term from a graph with a singlevertex with incoming lines,and we can
only get itsadjoint from a graph with a singlevertex with outgoing lines.
This contribution is nothing but the integrated ^-term of the original
superpotential,or itsadjoint.Thus we see again that there is no finiteor
       renormalizationof ^-terms to any order of perturbationtheory.
infinite



                                Problems

  1. Use Eq. (30.2.18)to calculate the propagators of the spinor and
     auxiliarycomponents of a chiral superfield.

  2. Consider a supersymmetric theory of a single left-chiralsuperfield
     O, with Lagrangian density


                       ^=^[^D+2Re(g[(D3]^),
      with g an arbitrarycomplex constant. Use the supergraph formalism
      to calculatethe one-loop contribution to the quantum effectiveaction.
      Express the answer as an integralover coordinates and over a single
      Grassman coordinate 6.

  3. What   is the superpropagator for a gauge superfield V(x,6) in a
      supersymmetric Abelian gauge theory with kinematic term (27.3.17)?



                               References

 1. A. Salam and J. Strathdee, Phys. Rev. Dll, 1521 (1975); Nucl. Phys.
    B86, 142 (1975); D. M. Capper, Nuovo Cimento 25A, 259 (1975);
    R. Delbourgo, Nuovo Cimento 25A, 646 (1975); D. M. Capper and
    G. Leibrandt, Nucl. Phys. B85, 492 (1975); F. Krause, M. Scheunert,
    J. Honerkamp, and M. Schlindwein, Phys. Lett. 53B, 60 (1974); K.
    Fujikawa and W. Lang, Nucl. Phys. B88, 61 (1975); J. Honerkamp,
    M. Schlindwein, F Krause, and M. Scheunert, Nucl. Phys. B95, 397
    (1975); S. Ferrara and O. Piguet, Nucl. Phys. B93, 261 (1975); R.
                            References                           317

   Delbourgo, J. Phys. Gl, 800 (1975).This formalism was extended to
   supergravity by W. Siegel,Phys. Lett. 84B, 197 (1979).
2. M. T Grisaru, W. Siegel,and M. Rocek, Nucl. Phys. B159,429 (1979).
                                 31


                         Supergravity




Gravity exists,so ifthere is any truth to supersymmetry then any realistic
supersymmetry theory must eventually be enlarged to a supersymmetric
theory of matter and gravitation,known as supergravity.Supersymmetry
without supergravity is not an option, though it may be a good
approximation
         at energies far below the Planck scale.
  There are two leading approaches to the construction of the theory
of supergravity. First, supergravity can be presented as a theory of
curved superspace.1 This approach is analogous to the development of
supersymmetric gauge theories in Sections 27.1-27.3; the gravitational
fieldappears as a component of a superfieldwith unphysical as well as
physical components, like the unphysical C, M, iV, and co components
of the gauge superfield V. The task of deriving the full non-linear
supergravity theory in this way is forbiddingly complicated, and so far
has not been freed of steps that are apparently arbitrary.At one point or
another in the derivation,ithas been necessary simply to statethat some
set of constraintson the graviton superfieldare the proper ones to adopt.
  Here we will follow a second approach that is less elegant but more
transparent.2In our discussion here, we begin in Sections 31.1-31.5 with
the case where the gravitationalfieldis weak,3 analyzing supergravity by
the same flat-spacesuperfieldmethods that we used in Chapters 26 and 27
to study ordinary supersymmetry theories.In thisway we can identifythe
physical components of the gravitationalsuperfield(including auxiliary
fieldsanalogous to the D-component of the gauge superfieldV.) The weak-
fieldapproximation will allow us to obtain some of the most important
consequences of supergravity theory,including the general formula for the
gravitino mass in Section 31.3 and the resultsfor gaugino masses and the
A and B parameters given by anomaly-mediated supersymmetry breaking
in Section 31.4.
  In Section 31.6 we add terms of higher order in G to the
       transformation rules for the physical fieldsand to the Lagrangian
supersymmetry
that describes their interactions,subject to the condition that the super-
symmetry transformations and general coordinate transformations form

                                  318
                       31.1 The Metric Superfield                     319

a closed algebra, and that the Lagrangian is invariant under these
transformations.
             This approach isin some respectsanalogous to the treatment
of supersymmetric gauge theoriesin Section 27.8; we work only with the
physical components of the gravitationalsuperfield,and obtain
         rulesthat involve covariant rather than ordinary derivatives.This
transformation
is the approach that has been used in deriving the most important
        of supergravity theory beyond the weak-field approximation: the
application
derivation of the low-energy effectiveLagrangian in theories of gravita-
tionallymediated supersymmetry breaking. This application isthe subject
of Section 31.7.



                     31.1     The Metric Superfield

Supergravity necessarilyinvolves spinor as well as tensor fields,so we
willhave to describe gravitationalfieldsin terms of a vierbein (or tetrad)
e?n(x) rather than a metric, which is relatedto the vierbein by

                        g,v(x) = r,abe%(x)ebv(x).                 (31.1.1)
The indices /x,v, etc.label general coordinates, while indices a, b, etc.
label coordinates in a locally inertialcoordinate system, with rjabthe
usual diagonal matrix with elements +1, +1, +1, —1. In the vierbein
formalism, the action must be supposed to be invariantunder two different
sorts of symmetry transformations: general coordinate transformations
x» _> x'^(x),under which the vierbein e%(x) is transformed into e'%(x),
where
                                      dxv
                            e'%(x') = —e%(x),                     (31.1.2)

and localLorentz transformations, under which

                         e%(x)^Aab(x)eb,(x),                      (31.1.3)
with Aat(x) an arbitrary realmatrix subject to the constraints

                         r,abAac(x)Abd(x)= rjcd.                  (31.1.4)
An elementary review of this formalism is given in the appendix to this
chapter.
  A weak gravitationalfieldis one for which the vierbein is close to the
unit matrix. In such a field,the vierbein may conveniently be written as

                        e\{x) = d; + 2K<t>\{x),                   (31.1.5)
where </>%(*)is small. As we shall see in Section 31.2, if </>% is to be a
conventionally normalized field,then the constant k should be expressed in
320                         31 Supergravity

terms of Newton's constant G by k = yjSnG. The closenessof the vierbein
to the unit matrix is preserved by a small coordinate transformation
                            x" ^ x" + £"(x),                     (31.1.6)
and also by small local Lorentz transformations

                         Aab(x) = Sab+(Dab(x),                (31.1.7)
where £M(x) and coab(x) are of the same order as 0%(x), and coab(x)=
         isconstrained by Eq. (31.1.4)to satisfy
*lacU>cb{x)
                          o>ab(x)= - o)ba{x).                 (31.1.8)
The combined transformations (31.1.2)and (31.1.3)then become
                                  1
               <M*)-►    <M*) + 2fC                               (31.1.9)
                                         dxv
We are now dropping the distinctionbetween general coordinate indices
;u,v, etc.and local Lorentz coordinate indices a, b, etc.,and raising and
lowering allindiceswith if* and ^v. In terms of the metric (31.1.1),the
weak fieldassumption (31.1.5)becomes

                        g/ivW = *\\iv
                                   + 2Khflv(x),                 (31.1.10)
with

                       VW     - <M*)   + <M*)>                  (3Li.il)
while the transformation law (31.1.9)reads
                              1    d^(x)     3£v(x)
           vw-^vw-                                              (31.1.12)
                              2k    dxv       3x^
  By use of the supersymmetry algebra we showed in Section 25.4 that the
graviton has a fermionic superpartner, the gravitino,with helicities
                                                                   ±3/2.
We saw in Section 5.9 that a self-charge-conjugatemassless particlewith
         +1 can only have low-energy interactionsifdescribed by a real
helicities
fieldA^(x) whose interactionsare invariantunder a gauge transformation
^Mx) —> A/i(x)+d/JlA(x).In the same way, a self-charge-conjugatemassless
particlewith          +3/2 can only have low-energy interactionsifitis
             helicities
described by a Majorana fieldxp^x) with an extra vector index /x,with
invariance under a gauge transformation

                       WW     -> VV*(*)+ dMx)     >             (31.1.13)
where xp(x) is an arbitrary Majorana field.3aWe need now to consider
how fields^(x) and vvM w^^ these transformation properties can be
put into a superfield.
  We found in Section 27.1 that a gauge fieldVv(x) can be regarded as the
Ky-component, defined in Eq. (26.2.10)as the coefficientof i(6ysyv6)/2,of
                       3LI   The Metric Superfield                    321

a realscalar superfieldV(x, 0).Similarly,we would liketo incorporate the
vierbein field(^^(x) and the gravitino fieldxp^x) into a vector superfield
Hn(x,0), known as the metric superfield.The question is:how are ^^{x)
and \pn(x)relatedto the components of this superfield?
  To address this question, note that supersymmetry requires the 'gauge'
transformations (31.1.9)and (31.1.13)to be specialcases of a
     of the whole metric superfield
transformation

                     H^x, 6) -+ H^x, 6) + A„(x, 0).               (31.1.14)
Furthermore, a weak gravitational field h^ interactswith an energy-
momentum    tensor T^v which as we found in Section 26.7 is a linear
combination of components of a real vector superfield©^, so we expect
the interactionof the whole superfieldH^ with matter to take the form

                        Mnt = 2k fd4x[H^®^D.                      (31.1.15)

(Later in thissectionwe willconfirm the correctnessof the coefficient2k,
with ©^ normalized as in Section 26.7.)The supercurrent ©^ was shown
in Section 26.7 to satisfythe conservation conditions

                             y^2®^    = 2X,                       (31.1.16)
where X is a real chiralscalar superfield(the sum of a left-chiral scalar
superfieldand  its complex  conjugate)  and 2) is the four-component su-
perderivative(26.2.26).It follows that thisinteractionisinvariantunder a
transformation of the form (31.1.14),with A^ of the form

                              A, = (<2^e) ,                       (31.1.17)
where H(x,0) is a superfield subject to the manifestly supersymmetric
condition
                                             =0.                  (31.1.18)
                             (99)    (®e)
This can be seen by recallingfrom Section 26.7 that the chiralitycondition
on X allows us to write itin the form
                              X=                                  (31.1.19)
                                     (^)Q,
with Q in general a non-local superfield.From Eq. (31.1.16)we then find


     / [@"KS)L=-/              [((^)^)]D—/            [(<***)],
                       = +
                             /[o(<2^)(<2>e)]d=0,
so that the interaction (31.1.15)is invariant under the transformation
Hp —► ff^+(^yMH). (We can also obtain the same resultwithout using the
322                                         31 Supergravity

representation(31.1.19)for X, by noting from Eq. (26.2.25)that the D-term
of the product of a chiral superfieldlikeX which satisfiesEqs. (26.3.1)
and (26.3.2)and a linear superfieldlike (3>E) which satisfiesEq. (26.3.45)
isa spacetime derivative.)
  At the end of thissectionwe shallshow that Eqs. (31.1.17)and (31.1.18)
yield conditions on the components of the superfieldAM:

                     + <(x)        -             +             -                ,       (31.1.20)
           K»                           ^                          2„„^
                                                     ^

                        -                    ~                     = dtfix),
                tit*)       hytffyx)             faPtfix)                               (31.1.21)

                 -                          = DAa(x) +                                  (31.1.22)
                     \ev»KadKV*{x)                            WCfe),

                                                 =                 = 0,                 (31.1.23)
                                   d"M£(x)           d^Nfa)
with Vp(x) a real vector field,and x(x) a Majorana spinor field.(Here we
introduce a notation that willbe used throughout this chapter; following
Eq. (26.3.9),the components Cs, cos, Ms, Ns, Fvs, Xs, and Ds of an
arbitrarysuperfieldS(x,0) are defined by the expansion

      s(x,6)=
                     cs(x)-i(ey5(os(x))-^(ey5e)Ms(x)-^(ee)Ns(x)

                     + l-(e y5 yv               -          (e        + l-
                                       e) vvs(x) i(e y5 e)    [xs(x)     $<os(x)])

                                                 +                    .                 (31.1.24)
                     -±(ey5ef(Ds(x)                   \vCs(x)\

Also, VAv(x) isthe Vv-component                   of A^.) This leads us to define the fields

                              <M*)       = V*{x) - i^v VHXx(x),                         (31.1.25)

                              -            -
                tp,(x)= A?(x)   \y,ynHp{x)   fo&tfix),                                  (31.1.26)

           ba(x) = DHa(x) + \e^KadKV^{x)                      + dad(>tf(x).             (31.1.27)
(As discussed in Section 31.3, the factor 1/2 introduced on the left-hand
side of Eq. (31.1.26)will give the field tp^ a conventional
      From Eqs. (31.1.20)and (31.1.21)itfollows that the transformation
normalization.)
(31.1.14)induces on (j)^v(x)and y^(x) the gauge transformations (31.1.9)
and (31.1.13),with

      =                        =                 +        +                    xp = 2X , (31.1.28)
 ^        -2kv,,         cv        4-^               1^       ^-^],
                        31.1 The Metric Superfield                           323

while Eq. (31.1.22)shows that b^(x) isinvariant.Also, Eq. (31.1.23)shows
that the transformation (31.1.14)induces shiftsof Mj*(x) and Nj*(x) that
leave invariantthe fields

                   s = d»M"(x),             p = d"N»(x).              (31.1.29)

Finally, since C*(x)9 Vfiv(x)— Kv^(x), and co^(x) are unconstrained by
supersymmetry, the transformation (31.1.14)allows us to make the
components                     = <t>nv—<t>vii,
                                            and co^(x) anything we like.In
         C^(x), V^v(x)— V^(x)
particular,in analogy with the Wess-Zumino     gauge for gauge superfields
discussed in Section 27.1,we can take C^(x), V^v(x)— Kv^(x) = <^v — </>v^,
and cojl(x)all to vanish. The fieldsh^v(x) and xp^x) are identifiedby
their transformation properties as the fieldsof the graviton and grav-
itino,respectively,while fc^(x),s(x), and p(x) are auxiliary fields4that
are important in understanding the coupling of the graviton superfieldto
matter.
   Incidentally,note that the number of independent components of the
symmetric tensor h^v modulo the gauge transformations (31.1.12)is 10 —
4 = 6, which with the auxiliaryfieldss9p, and b^ gives a totalof 6+6 = 12
independent physical bosonic fields,while the number of independent
physical components of the Majorana spinor fieldxp^ modulo the gauge
transformations (31.1.13)is 16 — 4 = 12. This satisfiesthe condition,
discussed at the end of Section 26.2, that in any supermultiplet of fields
that furnishesa representation of the supersymmetry algebra, there must
be equal numbers of independent bosonic and fermionic fieldcomponents.
  Let us now return to the interaction of matter and gravitation. In
general, the integrated D-term of the product of two superfields©^ and
H^ is given by Eq. (26.2.25)as

                               -                           Ho r®
   fd4x
          [&AHll]D=
                       fd4x        d^CHG d»C? + CHa Df + DHa C{a

                                 +    i           -           + V"
                      -(«,"" [A?          *»?])       ([JHa          f\mf)

                      +MHaM?       + NHaNf-           VHKa V®        (31.1.30)


Using Eqs. (31.1.25)—(31.1.27),we may express V^v, X^, and Dff
      in terms
respectively   of <p^v,xp^,and b^, and find

   Iint= 2k fd4x [©"tfj

      = 2k f d*x
                   \CH°[acf-       d0&>Cf + Df] + ba Cf
324                             31 Supergravity

                                                   -
          +(mH°[-Xf-     $<of + day»a>?})              (xp"<of)
                                                                  +
                                                                      (qfyrftof)
          + MHaM?    + NHaN?

                                 ao V®
                                    vXa — M]
          + i6^>v„3KCf-f                  nXa V@P f.                         (31.1.31)

We saw in Section 26.7 that the conservation condition (31.1.16)yields
conditions (26.7.44),(26.7.39),and (26.7.35):
                     D& = -°Cf + d,dvCf ,
                           -
                      Af =   ?cof + dvy^<o& ,


which respectivelytellus that the coefficientsin Eq. (31.1.31)of CHg,
of o5Ha, and of the antisymmetric part of </>^vallvanish. Also, we may
write the remaining terms of Eq. (31.1.31)in terms of the supersymmetry
current (26.7.20),the energy-momentum    tensor (26.7.42),the ^-current
(26.7.51):


                    ■»uv
                    1    —                        0A
                      H\>      iiv 2 y v\ii ^\i\y
                           o2 y\iv
                    ^ = 2C0",
and densitiesM    and Jf defined by
                     M®    =                   N,? = duJT.                   (31.1.32)
                               dpJt,
and given by Eqs. (26.7.33)and (26.7.34)as:
                          jr = -ax     ,       m   = bx                      (31.1.33)
where X is the real chiral superfieldappearing on the right-hand side of
the conservation equation (31.1.16).(A label 'new' on the supersymmetry
current will be understood in this chapter.) The first-orderinteraction
between matter and the components of the metric superfieldis then

2k fd4x             = k fd4x               +                             .
          [®^]D                  [®aba  {S<7\pG-2J?s-2jrp+TKah(7K\
                                                                 (31.1.34)
We note that the gravitino fieldinteractswith the supersymmetry current,
in much the same way as the gravitationalfieldinteractswith the energy-
momentum    tensor.
  We can now check the constant factor appearing in thisinteraction.The
usual definitionof T^v is that the variation of the matter action under a
change dg^v in the metric is5


                     diM=y<i4xvv*gTKvdgflv.
                            31.1 The Metric Superfield                   325

The interactionbetween matter and a weak gravitationalfieldgiven by
Eq. (31.1.10)isthen



which agrees with the h^ -dependent part of Eq. (31.1.34),thus confirming
the normalization of the interaction(31.1.15).
                                         * * *
  We shallnow check that Eqs. (31.1.17)and (31.1.18)yield the conditions
                  The superfieldY =
(31.1.20)-(31.1.23).                        has the components
                                     T^s)
              CT = —j'Tr(eaj~),
              a? = -iy5 $CS + ME-          iy5Ns+    fs ,
              MT    = -Tr(ey5As),
              iVT = iTr(eAs),
                                  - iTr(ey5 [y*,
              Vj = -Tr(ey5AvAs)                  $W),
               AT = -       -         -               - dv VEv,
                      0MS     iy5 $N=   iy5(DE + DCS)
              Dr = iTr(e ^s) + iTr(eDo>s),
and the condition (31.1.18)yields
               MT    = Nr = Dr + DCT       = dxVJ = AT+ $(or = 0 .

The vanishing of MT        and Nr tellsus that As is a linearcombination of
the form
                        Fe = f^f + g„y5y" + *„» [y",yv] .            (31.1.35)
The vanishing of dxVj and Dr + DCT               then implies that
                                        = V      = 0.                (31.1.36)
                                 <W
Also, the vanishing of AT+ $cor yields

                               DE =                                  (31.1-37)
                                        ^y5[f,W?-
The components        of A^(x, 6) are
          =                                                          (31.1.38)
     C^   iTr(ey5y^(oE),
        = i ihfuC3 + ysy^Mz - iy^NE +                                (31.1.39)
     tf                                  ysypy^Fps,
        = -Tr(ey„As),                                                (31.1.40)
    M£
        = iTr(ey5y,n,                                                (31.1.41)
    N}
        = Tr (eyvy^A2) - iTr (e [yv, @] y^ aiE),                     (31.1.42)
    Kv
        = y5 fapM5- + i 0y„iVs - iy^DE + DCs) + ysfydv*f.            (31.1.43)
     Aj
326                                     31 Supergravity

           = iTr(6 ^5y^s)           + inTr(6y5^cos).                      (31.1.44)
      Dj
The symmetric part of Eq. (31.1.42)gives condition (31.1.20),with
                                    —
                          v^ =          Tr^y^co") + constant.             (31.1.45)
A linear combination          of Eqs. (31.1.39) and (31.1.43)yields condition
(31.1.21),with

                          X = 2y5M* + 2iNE + constant.                    (31.1.46)
We   then use the antisymmetric part of Eq. (31.1.42),together with
Eqs. (31.1.37),(31.1.38),and the identities

           bv, yP]jn - bn, yP]jv = 2^pyv - 2*/vp)v+ 2'6wa ysyx,

                              ev»K<7bv,y,]=2iy5bK,y°],
and find the condition (31.1.22).Finally,Eqs. (31.1.40)and (31.1.41)along
with Eqs. (31.1.35)and (31.1.36)yield the condition (31.1.23).



                       31.2         The Gravitational Action

To find a suitablegravitationalaction,we must construct a superfieldthat
is invariant under the generalized gauge transformation H^ —► H^ + A^.
As a startingpoint, we recallthat the fieldb^ defined by Eq. (31.1.27)is
invariantunder thistransformation. By making successivesupersymmetry
transformations we can see that b^ is the C-component of an 'Einstein'
superfieldE^ whose components are
                          =
                  cl          bn »                                         (31.2.1)
                          =             ~                                  (31.2.2)
                  <°i         2L»           2y^Lv'
                 M*       =                            =
                              d^s,                N%       dtf ,           (31.2.3)
                      E         3             1              l
                                                                           (31.2.4)
                          =                                                (31.2.5)
                  tf          ^yv(«v£- $tf,
                          =          ~
                  Dl          d^by     D^ ,                                (31.2.6)
where E^ is the linearizedEinstein tensor

                                                       -
                 Epv = j (dndvhxx + °V                     d^hxv
                                -                          +
                       -dvdxhXll vD^                           V^dPhxp)    (31.2.7)
                         31.2 The GravitationalAction                                327

and

                              U       = ie^Kpy5y,dKipp,                           (31.2.8)
which willbe shown in Section 31.3 to be the left-hand side of the wave
equation for a free massless fieldof spin 3/2. For instance,by applying
the supersymmetry transformation rules (26.2.11),(26.2.15),and (26.2.17)
for CH, V**, and DH to Eqs. (31.2.1)and (31.1.27)we find

         dCEG = i(ays       -                                                 .
                      [$XHG   {ie^K°y5y,dKtf                    +d°dKa>J!])
Comparison    of thiswith the transformation rule (26.2.11)for CE shows
that

               a>E°=MH°           -\iev»K<7ysy,dKtf          + d°dKcD?
We can use Eq. (31.1.26)to express tf in terms of xp^ and off:

                              =      -       -
                         tf       Via yflpvP   y^pco^,
and find that coE may be written in terms of \pa alone
                                  -             -            y* dK\pv .
                   ^a =$Vo            SGyp\pp       \i€viacays
Using the identity
                     ~                    -
               W         ^aTv = i€tixvpysyp {iy^yGe<TxvPysyp,
we find Eq. (31.2.2)for coE. Continuing in the same way gives the other
formulas (31.2.3)—(31.2.6)for the components of E^ and confirms that
these components make up a real superfield.
  We can now form a quadratic action for the metric superfieldthat is
        under both supersymmetry and the extended gauge transformation
invariant
   —►
ifji H^ + A,,,by taking the Lagrangian density as

      S£E = I            =               -            -                           (31.2.9)
              (E,H»)D         E^hT           \%I/         l(s2+p2-   b»b»).

The factor4/3 ischosen to give the kinematic Lagrangian for the graviton
fielda conventional sign and normalization: apart from terms involving
3^/fyyor hxx,itisa sum of Klein-Gordon Lagrangians for the components
of hpy. The normalization of the gravitino fieldis discussed in the next
section.
  To see that the firsttwo terms in the finalexpression in Eq. (31.2.9)are
invariantunder the gauge transformations (31.1.12)and (31.1.13),we note
that £^v and L^ are manifestly invariant under these transformations,
and that the action is symmetric between the two factors of h^v or xp^
appearing in these terms. The absence in Eq. (31.2.9)of derivativesof 5,
p, and b^ shows that these are auxiliaryfields.The fieldequations make
328                             31 Supergravity

them vanish for pure gravitation,but not when gravitation is coupled to
matter.
  Before taking up the coupling of matter and gravitation,letus pause
to consider what value we should give the normalization constant k
in Eqs. (31.1.5)and (31.1.10). The Einstein-Hilbert action for a pure
gravitationalfieldis

                        lGR =                                             (3L210)
                                 -i^oId4x^R'
where G is the Newton constant of gravitation,g(x) is the determinant
of the metric tensor g^v(x), and R(x) is the curvature scalar calculated
from g^vM- To calculate Iqr for a weak gravitationalfieldwith g^v =
             we may recallthat for arbitrary variations Sg^v(x) in the
jfyv+ 2fc/fyv>
gravitationalfield6

                                                          <5g,v,          (31.2.11)
         ^^itol^^                     R»v-\g»vR
where R^v(x) is the Ricci tensor calculated from g^v(x). For a weak field
with g^v = *\\iv
              + 2fc/fyv>the Ricci tensor is7

         R^   = K(nhnv _ dxd»hxv _ dxdvhx» +
                                                     dndvhx^ 9            (31.2.12)
so for weak fields
                           R1" - \g^R       = 2kE^    ,                   (31.2.13)
and therefore Eq. (31.2.10)gives

                        SIGR =
                                 ^Jd4xE^dh,v.
On the other hand, taking account of the symmetry                  of / d4x E^v hT
between the two factorsof h itcontains, we have

                     d f d4x E»v V   = 2 / d4x E»v <5
                                                    V

In order for the term E^v Wv in Eq. (31.2.9)to give the usual gravitational
Lagrangian density,itistherefore necessary to take
                                  K=^SnG.                                 (31.2.14)
  Let's now combine the Einstein Lagrangian density (31.2.9)with the
interaction(31.1.34)between gravitation and matter and with the matter
Lagrangian jS?m, to form a total Lagrangian density:
          <£=<£M   + E,vh»v - \xp^ - l(s2+ p2- b^)
               +2k i_ bG + \SGxpa-Jis-J^p     +         .
                                                \TKGhaK] (31.2.15)
                        31.2 The GravitationalAction                               329

The fieldequations for the auxiliaryfieldsgive

     s = -6kJ?/8   ,     p = -6kJT/%          ,       b^
                                                           = -6k^/16    .      (31.2.16)

Using thisto eliminatethe auxiliaryfields,
                                         the Lagrangian density (31.2.15)
now gives

        <£ = J£?M + E^v           -           + \k\J11 + JT2-
                             \xp^                                      \0t^)
             + {KSaxpa + kTkgK                                                 (31.2.17)
The sources of the fieldsxp^ and h^v are of order k, so we can regard
these fieldsas being of this order, which makes allterms in Eq. (31.2.17)
beyond S£m of order k2.
   In the vacuum only the scalarfieldss and p can have
tree-approximation
      expectation values, giving the vacuum an energy density, to order
G:

        PVAC = —&VAC          = —&MVAC        ~              + jr2).           (31.2.18)
                                                  \k?
The negative sign of the term in the vacuum energy density of firstorder
in G is a characteristicdifferencebetween theories of supergravity and
ordinary supersymmetry.
  For instance, in the theory of a single left-chiralsuperfield 0 with
superpotential /(O), the zeroth-order vacuum energy is — $£m vac =
|d/(0)/#|2, while Eqs. (31.1.33)and (26.7.27)give
                       '
                        + LV = ~

so to firstorder in G, the totalvacuum            energy is
                              2       8nG
                   dm)
          Pvac =                                                               (31.2.19)
                       d<i)                 **Sr-w>
where </>is the scalar component of O. This is for the definitionof the
metric for which the energy-momentum      tensor is given by Eq. (26.7.42),
so that in particular Txx vanishes for / = 0. For other definitionsthe
vacuum energy would be changed by terms of order 87rG|</>|2|d/(</>)/d</
However, thisambiguity is unimportant in calculatingthe minimum value
of the vacuum energy. Inspection of Eq. (31.2.19)shows that if /(</>)is
                                                                    —
stationaryat some point fo, then pvac has a localminimum for \(/> </>o|
and \df/d<l>\of firstorder in G, and at any such point the vacuum energy
to firstorder in G is

                          pVAc = -247rG|/(0o)|2                                (31.2.20)
  There is an algebraic reason why vacuum stateswith unbroken super-
symmetry in supergravity theories cannot have positive energy density.
330                         31 Supergravity

The solutions of the Einstein fieldequations for a uniform non-zero
     energy density pv take the form of a de Sitterspace for py > 0 and
vacuum
anti-de Sitterspace for pv < 0. These spaces may be described as the
surfaces

                          *5 + ripyxW = R2 ,                    (31.2.21)
in a quasi-Euclidean five-dimensional space with lineelement
                         ds2 = rj^xv    ± dx\ ,                 (31.2.22)
with the upper sign for de Sitter space and the lower sign for anti-de
Sitterspace. The spacetime symmetry of these spaces is no longer the
Poincare group consisting of translationsand Lorentz transformations,
but instead 0(4,1) for de Sitterspace and 0(3,2) for anti-de Sitterspace,
where 0(n,m) is the group of lineartransformations that leave invariant
a diagonal metric with n positive and m negative elements on the main
diagonal. The supersymmetry that isunbroken in theorieswith a de Sitter
or anti-de Sittervacuum state therefore has the simple group 0(4,1) or
0(3,2), respectively,as its spacetime symmetry. Nahm7" has cataloged
all supersymmetries with simple spacetime symmetries. There are simple
0(3,2) supersymmetries, as well as iV-extended 0(3,2) supersymmetries,
but for 0(4,1) there is only an N = 2 supersymmetry. We have been
considering N = 1 supergravity theories here, so they can have vacuum
states with unbroken supersymmetry and pv < 0, which gives 0(3,2)
spacetime symmetry, but not with unbroken supersymmetry and pv > 0,
which would give 0(4,1) spacetime symmetry.
   The possibilityof vacuum field configurations with negative energy
density may seem at firstsight to threaten the stabilityof our universe.
It iscommon for /(</>)  to have several stationarypoints,at which ittakes
differentvalues.Even ifwe fine-tunethe parameters in /(</>)so that /(</>)
vanishes at one of these stationary points, accounting for the observed
nearly flatspace of our universe, any other stationary point with a
                    willyield a lower vacuum energy, raisingthe possibility
      value of /(</>)
nonzero
of a collapse to a state of negative energy density, with a metric that
would have to be of the 'anti-deSitter'form rather than flat.
   Fortunately, the value (31.2.20)isjust barely insufficiento compensate
for the positiveenergy that has to go into surface tension in making a
bubble of anti-de Sitterspace, so that the transitionfrom ordinary flat
space is not actually favored energetically.Coleman and de Luccia8 have
applied the equations of general relativityto a bubble of negative internal
energy density —e and positivesurface tension S in a flatspace of energy
density zero, and have shown that any such bubble that does not entail
gravitationalsingularities willhave positiveenergy if
                              e < 6nGS2 .                       (31.2.23)
                          31.2 The GravitationalAction                           331

The surface tension is the energy per area in the bubble surface,given to
zeroth order in G by the integralof the energy density through the bubble
wall:
                                      2           2"
                                 \\d<f>    df(<t>)
                    Si                  +                        (31.2.24)
                       =\y       \\~dr       d(j>
with r_ and r+ taken just inside and just outside the bubble wall. This
can be rewrittenas


       Si          dr     d±,,(dmy
            -s:           dr    H       d(t> J              \   dr   d<p J

where t; is an arbitrary phase factor with |^| = 1. The integral in the
second term istrivial:sincewe assume that </>(r+)  isat a value where /(</>)
is stationary and vanishes, while </>(r_)
                                        is at some value </>owhere /(</>)is
stationarybut non-zero, the integralis
                            '+       d4>df(4>)
                          /:
To maximize       this term, we take £ = /(</>o)/l/(</>o)l>
                                                       and obtain the
inequality9
                                     Si > 2|/((/>o)l,                        (31.2.25)
with equality attained only if (as is usual) there is a solution of the
          equation d(j)/dr= —^(df/dcj))* with the appropriate boundary
differential
conditions. The inequality (31.2.23)is thus satisfiedif the internal
     density is not lessthan — 247rG|/(</>o)|2,
energy                                         which is preciselythe value
(31.2.20).This calculationleaves open the possibilityof an instabilityof
flatspace due to radiativecorrections,but the reader need not worry: it
has been proved that in supergravity theoriesin which there is a vacuum
fieldconfigurationwith zero vacuum energy, the energy of any disturbance
in the fieldswhich islimited to a finiteregion is positive.10


  Eq. (26.7.48) shows that the energy-momentum                  tensor for a set of
left-chiral
          scalar superfieldsQ>n contains a term
                                 1          _
                        AT»v =                                 •             (31.2.26)
                                     (yvD        dndv^ J2 \<j>n\2
                                                        n
Integrating by parts, the corresponding interaction Kh^AT^                   makes   a
contribution to the action of the form

                                                   =                         (31.2.27)
      | /54X^|^|2(^VD-3^V)V                            V)£|4>„|2,
332                                   31 Supergravity

where R^ is the curvature scalar in linear approximation. This is
added to the usual Einstein-Hilbert action —JgR/lK2  (which appears
in Eq. (31.2.17)as the term E^h^) and has the effectof replacing the
coefficientof thisterm with

                                  =                                                 (3'-228)
        -^X>i2                         -^('-f?'*"|!)-
In order to restorethe usual constant of gravitation,we can subject the
metric to a Weyl transformation,replacing the vierbein ea^ with


                           pa = pa                                                  (31.2.29)
                                               i-tD*»i2-
                                           N
That is,we replace the metric g^ with

                                        -
                           guv = (i            \ Yl i^"i2) &«                       (31.2.30)

or for weak fields

                            v=v-iE                       i^i2 v    •                (31.2.31)

The weak fieldEinstein tensor (31.2.7)for the new metric is



      = E^ -               -                   I^»l2•                               (31.2.32)
                  -(dpd*       i^d)    E

The sum of the Einstein term in the originalaction and the term (31.2.27)
is then

              L^V      +                             -                 =
                           J E    l^l2(^VD               W)       V1              V^"v
      Jd4x                                                                 Jd4x

                                                                                    (31.2.33)

so the effectivegravitational constant is now actually constant. This
redefinitionof the metric also produces a change in the potential. The
originalLagrangian density contains a term — e^n |3/(0)/30„|2,which in
terms of the new vierbein reads

        -«£       |3/(0)/30„|2 = -e£               |<W)/#„|2
              n                                n

                                       -^rfei^Eww)/^..!2.
                           31.3 The Gravitino                          333

With the new definitionof the metric, the potential(31.2.19)is therefore
replaced with

                         3/(0)                        - 3/(0)
             Pvac = 5Z
                         d(t>n -tE*»          d(j>n
                                           dMY2
                    +^few2)£                                      (31.2.34)
                                            d(/>n

The new term does not change the value of pvac at itsstationary point
to order k2, so no change isneeded in our previous discussion of vacuum
stability.



                          31.3   The Gravitino

In thissectionwe willuse the weak fieldformalism developed in Sections
31.1-31.3 to derive some properties of the gravitino. In particular,by
using an argument of continuity as G —► 0 we shallobtain a formula for
the gravitino mass when supersymmetry is spontaneously broken that is
valid to firstorder in G but to allorders in allother interactions.(The
originalderivation of thisformula willbe given in Section 31.6.)
  Firstwe must verifythat the term — \\ppU- in Eq. (31.2.9)isthe correct
free-fieldLagrangian for a massless self-charge-conjugateparticleof spin
3/2. The time-honored approach to the construction of suitablefree-field
Lagrangians for particleswith spin isto guess at the Lagrangian and then
check that itgives a physicallysatisfactoryfieldequation and propagator.
This has led to some uncertainty for particlesof spin 3/2 — for instance,
what is usually called the Rarita-Schwinger Lagrangian in papers on
supersymmetry is not the Lagrangian originallyproposed by Rarita and
Schwinger.11 Here we shall follow an approach in the spiritof Section
6.2:we willfirstderive the propagator from the requirements of Lorentz
invariance for a massive particleof spin 3/2 and then invert it to find
the Lagrangian. We work here with massive gravitinos for the sake of
simplicityand because in the real world we must take account of the
breakdown of supersymmetry, but we will be able to apply the results
obtained in this way to the case of massless gravitinos by noting that
supersymmetry current conservation makes the zero-mass singularities     in
the propagator inconsequential.
  A spinor fieldxp^ with an extra vector index belongs to the [(^,0)+
(0> i)l x ({9 5) representation of the homogeneous      Lorentz group. To
isolatethe (1, {)+ (5,1) parts of the free field,we impose the irreducibility
334                                    31 Supergravity

condition
                                                = 0.                           (31.3.1)
                                          W
Rotational invariance and Eq. (31.3.1)tellus that the matrix elements
of this field between the vacuum and a massive spin 3/2 particle of
momentum    q = 0 and spin z-component s will satisfythe conditions
                                        (0|V°(0)|5>=0                          (31.3.2)
and
                       3/2
                    £    (0|V'(0)|5>          oc Stj - iW
                                   (0\xpJ(0)\s)*                     ,         (31.3.3)
                   5=-3/2
with a coefficientthat may depend on the rotationallyinvariant matrix
  = iy°. With the usual Dirac convention that               = (0|y'(0)|s)
P                                               j3(0|t//(0)|s)
(chosen to simplify the space inversion property of the field)and a
          choice of normalization of the p = +1 component analogous to
conventional
Eq. (5.5.23),Eq. (31.3.3)may be written
       3/2
                              =                     -                      .   (31.3.4)
       JT <0|V'(0)|s><0|v^(0)|s>*(27T)"3(!±£)
                                        V     ' [Stj iW]
      5=-3/2
It follows that the momentum-space              propagator for a spin 3/2 particleof
mass mg takes the form

                                   A"V(4) =           2 - >                    (3L3-5)
                                              qz2^+ mj — le
where P^v(q) is a Lorentz-covariant polynomial in the four-vector q,
subject to the conditions that for q = 0 and q° = mg, we have

       pij =                       -              Pi0 = pw = p00 = o               (31.3.6)
               (±^£)         [su       iW],

Apart from possible terms that vanish on the mass shell(and whose effect
therefore would be the same as direct current-current interactions)the
unique covariant function with thislimitis

"•<«> -                                                -                •      -
                               (-"*+m<K                         («+ra«)
             (""+%)                               (t       C)     £)      (f
                                                                 (31.3.7)
(The differencebetween Eq. (31.3.7)and any other covariant function
with the limit (31.3.6)would be a covariant function whose components
all vanish for q = 0 and q° = mg and hence vanish everywhere on the
mass shell.)The free-fieldLagrangian density is then of the form

                              ifo = -i(v'l^vH'3)vv),                               (31.3.8)
                           31.3 The Gravitino                          335

where

                           A'"(q)Dvi(q) = 8$.                      (31.3.9)
A tedious but straightforward calculationgives

                 £M<?) = ~^/d        75 / qK - \rrigbv, yd >      (31.3.10)
so that the Lagrangian density (31.3.8)is

     jS?0= -{ie^K*   {xpvysy,dKipx)
                                        + \mg(xpv [y\
                                                      y*]xpx)
                                                              .   (31.3.11)
For mg = 0 thisresultverifiesthat the term — ±vyt/ in Eq. (31.2.9)is the
correctconventionally normalized free-field Lagrangian for a massless self-
                          of
charge-conjugate particle spin 3/2.    In the limitmg —► 0 the propagator
given by Eqs. (31.3.5)and (31.3.7)is singular (which just reflectsthe
impossibilityshown in Section 5.9 of forming a (1, 5) + (5,1) fieldfrom
the creation and annihilation operators for a massless particleof helicity
±3/2), but the terms in Eq. (31.3.7)for P»v(q) that blow up for mg -► 0
are allproportional to q^ and/or qv, and hence give no contribution when
the current with which xp^ interactsisconserved.
  As a further check on the validityof the Lagrangian density (31.3.11),
including the peculiar-looking mass term, we note that it yields a field
equation
            -ie^Kk ys y, dK xpx + \mg [f, yx]xpx= 0 .             (31.3.12)
Taking the divergence of thisequation yields the resultthat


Also, contracting Eq. (31.3.12)with yv shows that

                            y5 yv)v dK xpx oc [ft,yx]\px= 0 ,
               yvxpvoc eviack
so that the irreducibility
                        condition (31.3.1)issatisfiedfor freefields(though
not necessarilywhen interactionsare taken into account). From these two
resultsthere follows another irreducibilitycondition



Using these irreducibilityresultsallows the fieldequation (31.3.12)to be
put in the form of a Dirac equation

                                 +           = 0,                 (31.3.13)
                            (^       mg)i/
which among other things shows that thisis the free fieldof a particleof
mass mg.
  We will now consider the effectsin supergravity theories of a
spontaneous
      breakdown of supersymmetry. Broken global supersymmetry entails
336                          31 Supergravity

the existence of a massless particleof spin 1/2, the goldstino, but in
supergravitytheories the goldstino field x can be eliminated by a gauge
transformation xp^ —► xp^— d^x- Since the gauge isthen fixed by the
     that the goldstino fieldiseliminated in this way, gauge invariance no
condition
longer keeps the gravitino massless, and itacquires a mass (to be denoted
mg from now on), in much the same way as we saw in Section 21.3 that the
vector bosons W± and Z° get masses from the spontaneous breakdown
of the SU(2) x U(l) gauge symmetry of the electroweak interactions.
   As discussed at the beginning of Chapter 28, if supersymmetry is
relevant at all to accessible phenomena     then the characteristicenergy
scale at which it is broken must be much lessthan the Planck mass. In
thiscase we may use a continuity argument to give a universal formula
for the gravitino mass mg. According to Eq. (31.1.34),the gravitino field
tp^ couples to the supersymmetry current S^ with a coupling constant
 \k = \yJ%nG, so the exchange of a virtualgravitino of four-momentum
q in a transitionA + B —► C + D contributes to the invariant amplitude a
term

   M(A + B -+ C + D) = i(8;rG)(C\S,\A)n A»v(q) {D\SV\B)N ,       (31.3.14)
where the subscript N indicates that the one-goldstino pole at q2 = 0
has been removed from the matrix element of the supersymmetry current.
For a supersymmetry-breaking scale sufficientlysmall compared with the
Planck mass, there willbe a range of momentum   transfersthat are much
larger than the gravitino mass but much  lessthan the Planck mass. For
such momenta, the matrix element isdominated by the l/mg terms in the
propagator numerator (31.3.7)

   Af(A + B->C+       />)-► WnG)(C\S,\A)N                   Wv|B)n    .
                                               [^T)
                                                                  (31.3.15)
                   large Planck mass the coupling of the gravitinobecomes
But for sufficiently
negligible,and the matrix element must be the same as would have been
produced by goldstino exchange in a theory without gravitinos.According
to Eq. (29.2.10),thisis

 M(A + B^C        + D)^   (C\S,\A)N                   (D\SV\B)N, (31.3.16)
                                      (^Pj   (^)
where F is the parameter characterizing the strength of supersymmetry
breaking (here taken real),defined so that the vacuum energy density is
F2/2. In order for Eqs. (31.3.15)and (31.3.16)to agree, the gravitino mass
must have the value

                                    AnGF2
                             mg = x—^—       .                   (31.3.17)
            31.4 Anomaly-Mediated      Supersymmetry Breaking         337

This formula is valid only to lowest order in GjF2, but to allorders (and
even non-perturbatively)in the non-gravitational interactionsresponsible
for the spontaneous breakdown of supersymmetry.
  It is convenient for some purposes to express mg in terms of the
expectation values (s)and (p) of the spinlessauxiliarygravitationalfields.
Note that for the vacuum state to have zero spacetime curvature, the
vacuum energy density F2/2 of matter fieldsmust be balanced by the
negative vacuum energy of gravitationand itsinteractionwith the hidden
sector fields,which is given in terms of (s) and (p) by Eqs. (31.2.18)and
(31.2.16)as -(4/3)((s)2 + (p)2),so

                       F2/2 = (4/3)((5)2+ (p)2).                  (31.3.18)
We can thereforewrite Eq. (31.3.17)as

                              =             + (p)2-               (31-3.19)
                         mg       ^\/(s)2
Itissometimes convenient to introduce a complex gravitino mass, defined
as

                         mg = y((s) + i<P>),                      (31.3.20)

whose absolute magnitude is the physical gravitino mass (31.3.19).



        31.4   Anomaly-Mediated        Supersymmetry   Breaking

In Section 28.3 the possibilitywas raised that supersymmetry may be
broken in some sort of hidden sector of superfieldsthat do not carry
the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(l) quantum numbers of the standard model, and
communicated to observable particlesgravitationally.In this section we
will deal with one class of supersymmetry-breaking effectsin the
      supersymmetric standard model, those of firstorder in k = ^SnG.
minimum
This includes the gaugino masses and the parameters Ay and B in the
Lagrangian density (28.4.1).Other supersymmetry-breaking effectssuch
as squark and slepton squared masses are of second order in k, and will
be taken up in Section 31.7, when we consider gravity-mediated super-
symmetry breaking using the general supergravity formalism described in
Section 31.6.
  We can find the effectsof gravity-mediated supersymmetry breaking to
firstorder in k by simply replacing the component fieldsof the
gravitational
         supermultiplet in the interaction(31.1.34)with their expectation
values. The only ones of these component fieldsthat can acquire non-
vanishing vacuum expectation values from the spontaneous breakdown
338                              31 Supergravity

of supersymmetry in a hidden sector of matter superfieldsare the spin-
less auxiliaryfieldss and p, so with Eq. (31.1.33)this gives a first-order
supersymmetry-breaking interaction
           =
      J§?(1)         — Ax(p) +             =                  +
               2k[               Bx'(5)]        3Im[i»*(,4*       iB*)] ,   (31.4.1)

where mg isthe complex gravitino mass (31.3.20),and Ax and Bx are the
A- and B-components of the realchiralscale-non-invariancesuperfieldX
discussed in Section 26.7.
  We showed in Section 26.7 that, for a renormalizable theory of left-
chiral superfieldsQ>n with superpotential /(O), the X superfieldis given
by

                                                                            (31.4.2)
                      JT-jIm       I>^-3/(.)
This can be put in a form that allows an immediate extension to more
general theories by writing the coupling parameters of the superpotential
in terms of dimensionless parameters and a parameter Jt with the
dimensions
      of mass. Since the superpotential has the dimensions of (mass)3, we
have

                                                                            (31.4.3)
                         "<*>+S>^-3/(.,.
Therefore Eq. (31.4.2)may be written

                            X = -Im             Mm
                                                                            (31.4.4)
                                3
This formula can be generalized to give the contribution to X of the
scale dependence of any sort of ^"-term in the Lagrangian. A term
2Re [f(0,W)]& in the Lagrangian makes a contribution to X given by
the obvious generalizationof Eq. (31.4.4):

                          * =                  ,em,w)
                                                                            (31.4.5)
                                 ^Im
(There isalso a contribution to X from any mass scale dependence in the
D-terms in the Lagrangian.) Comparing Eq. (31.4.5)with Eqs. (26.3.10)
and (26.3.13),we see that
                       2Jt d r„,_ „„i           2JVdf(<l>,XL)
       AA + iBA =               \mW)}' '16=0 =z4-2>i                        (31.4.6)
                        3i dJK\ ljy
There will then be a supersymmetry-breaking term in the effective
Lagrangianof firstorder in k, given by Eqs. (31.4.1)and (31.4.6)as

                            =           ,,J?df(<l>,AL)]
                       jSf}.1)-2Re     m„                                   (31.4.7)
            31A Anomaly-Mediated    Supersymmetry Breaking           339

  Eq. (31.4.7)applies not only for terms in the Lagrangian with explicit
scaledependence, but also for the scale dependence of coupling constants
described by the renormalization group.lla This scale dependence arises
from the quantum mechanical anomaly that gives a non-zero value to the
trace of the energy-momentum    tensor and also to the divergence of the
R-current, so the observable supersymmetry-breaking effectsthat arisein
thisway are said to be anomaly-mediated.
  Consider in particular the kinematic term ifgauge for renormalizable
supersymmetric gauge theories,given by Eqs. (27.3.22)and (27.3.23)as

                ^gauge = "i>Re      £ [€*fiWAaWAf\r    .          (31.4.8)
                           2g       Aoip
This does not depend explicitlyon any mass scale, but the coupling
constant g has the familiar dependence on a renormalization scale Jt,
given by the renormalization group equation



Then  Eq. (31.4.7)shows that the gauge Lagrangian       (31.4.8)yields a
supersymmetry-breaking term in the Lagrangian

          ^ gauge       3 ^      Wig^Z 6ocp^ALoc^ALp             (31.4.10)
                                    A<x0
where Xaul is the left-handed part of the gaugino field,normalized like
Waol by multiplicationwith the gauge coupling g, so that g does not appear
in the structureconstants or the interactionof the gauge superfieldwith
quark superfields.Taking account of this normalization convention, the
gaugino mass equals g2 times the absolute value of the coefficientof
I Y,A<xpe<xp^ALa^ALp^OT

                                 =               .              (31.4.11)
                         Wgaugino mg
                                       I o   I
In thisformula mgaugino and g are cut-off-dependent bare parameters in
the Lagrangian, governed by Wilsonian renormalization group equations.
In Section 27.6 we saw that p(g) arisespurely from one-loop diagrams, so
that p(g) = fcg3,with b a,constant, and therefore
                                  =
                          Wgaugino mg \b\g2 .                   (31.4.12)
The physical mass of the gaugino differsfrom Eq. (31.4.12)by corrections
of higher order in g but, since we know that gauginos must be much
heavier than the characteristicscale of quantum chromodynamics, these
correctionsare small for the gluino as well as for the wino and bino.
340                            31 Supergravity

   Supersymmetry does not allow any explicitlyscale-dependent terms in
the Lagrangian for the gluon and quark superfields,so, with electroweak
interactionsneglected,Eq. (31.4.12)gives the only contribution of order
k to the gluino mass. For three quark generations, Eq. (28.2.10)gives
b = -3g53/167r2.Taking g2/4n = 0.118, Eq. (31.4.12)gives the gluino mass
as

                     mg,uino= ^T      = 2'8 x 10"2 ms •          (31.4.13)

On the other hand, there is a scale-dependent interaction in the
Lagrangianfor the Higgs superfields,produced by the /x-term—^(HjeHi) in
Eq. (28.1.7),so there is a term in the Lagrangian given by Eq. (31.4.7)as
2Re[m*/i(^f^^fi)]. Comparing with the B/x-term in Eq. (28.4.1),we see
that this gives
                                 B = -mg .                       (31.4.14)
  With three generations of quarks and lepton superfieldsand one pair
of Higgs doublet superfieldsHx and H2, Eqs. (28.2.8)and (28.2.9)give
b = 11/167T2 for the U(l) gauge coupling g' and b = 1/I6n2 for the
SU(2) gauge coupling g. Taking g'2/4n = 0.0102 and g2/4n = 0.0338,
Eq. (31.4.11)would give masses 8.9 x 10~3mg and 2.7 x 10~3mg for the
bino and wino, respectively.However, the bino and wino masses also
      contributions of order gamg/l6n2 and g2mg/16n2, respectively,
receive                                                              from
diagrams  in which the  bino or wino is attached to a higgs-higgsino loop,
with supersymmetry breaking introduced by the term 2Re \mg\i(tfJe^i)]
in the Lagrangian density.This gives the bino and wino masses1 lb

                     mbino = T71^l11-/(4ll          >            (31A15)

                                i2™g
                     ^wino =                                     (31.4.16)
                                I6n2
where m^ is the pseudoscalar particlemass defined by Eq. (28.5.21),and

                               fix) =       .                     (31.4.17)
                                     |^
The implications of these resultswillbe considered furtherin Section 31.7.
  Finally,there is a scale-dependent field-renormalizationfactor Zr
        the kinematic Lagrangian density [0>*e~vQ>r]Dfor any left-chiral
multiplying
superfield Or. This can be moved from the kinematic D-terms to the
                                                   1/2
superpotential J^-terms by absorbing a factor Zr       in Or. The Yukawa
couplings hrst (such  as the hfp fty  and h\j  in Eq. (28.1.7))in the tri-
linear superpotential terms J2rsthrstQ>rQ>s^>t then multiplied with a
                                              are
                 '     ' that
factor Zr    Zi    Z,~         depends on the cut-off M. According to
                 31.5 Local Supersymmetry Transformations                          341

Eq. (31.4.7),the interaction if(1)will then make                  a contribution to the
Lagrangian density:
                           = "2
              ^vikawa               E ^Re        [K>h«4>r4>34>t],              (31.4.18)
                                    rst
where
           d\nhrst{Jt)
  Jrst= Jt —
           1 J\nZr{Ji)                  1 J\nZs{Ji)         1 J\xiZt(Jl)
                                                                               (31419)
           2          3^                2       3^          2

                           Ay, Ay, and Ay in Eq. (28.1.7)are given by11*
We see that the coefficients

                                m         * m     * dlnhfi
                                    =         =            >                   <31A20>
                            4           K$      f-rf-
where N = £, D, or U. This gives Ay and Ay of order g2mg/$n2, while
Ay is of order g2mg/8n2 or g'2mg/8n2.


              31.5     Local Supersymmetry               Transformations

As a last step before considering the effectsof higher order in G on
supersymmetry transformation rules,we willnow complete our discussion
of the transformation rules of the physical components of the graviton
superfieldH^ and other superfieldsto lowest order in G.
  Let us firstnote the form that these transformation rules take when
expressed in terms of the physical fieldsh^, xp^ b^ s9 and p in a 'Wess-
Zumino' gauge in which
                                            =              = 0.                 (31.5.1)
                            C?=o>?              V»-^
Using the identification(31.1.25)-(31.1.27),(31.1.29),and (31.1.11)of the
physical  fieldswith components   of the superfieldH^, together with the
general transformation  rules                   and the 'gauge' conditions
                              (26.2.11)-(26.2.17)
(31.5.1),we find the transformation rules

         5V  = 5 bvv>v +
                (a          7vVv]) >                                            (31.5.2)

         5v„ = [i[yv, Jx] dxV + d^x                    + 2iy5bfl- liytfpysb"

                      + iJnS-                                                   (31.5.3)
                                        fiy^5p]a,
           Ss=                                                                  (31.5.4)
                     \(otyxLx),
           Sp = -\i(ay5yxLx),                                                   (31.5.5)
342                           31 Supergravity

               =              -                    ,               (31.5.6)
           Sbf, lifaysL^           \i (ay5y^vLv)
where L^ is given by Eq. (31.2.8):

                          L^ie^K"y5yvdKxpp.
This transformation shiftsthe components                        —
                                               Cf{, cofj,and V^   V^ away
from zero,by the amounts

                     SC»=0,      5<o» = V%foL,                     (31.5.7)
                           - V»] =          -        ■
                     8[V?„          (a [yrf   yvrf])               (31.5.8)

We can then return to the gauge satisfyingEq. (31.5.1)by making a
suitablegauge transformation H^ —► H^ + A^, where A^ is a superfieldof
the form (31.1.17),(31.1.18),with components
                                    =                              (31.5.9)
                      C,A=0,    coJ -K,V«,
                          " V* =          -             •         (31.5.10)
                      <           (a [yvAj yX])
  So far,thishas been for global supersymmetry transformations, with a
an infinitesimalconstant Majorana spinor. At leastin lowest order, this
symmetry can be easilyextended to localsupersymmetry transformations,
with a(x) given an arbitrarydependence on x1*.According to Eq. (26.7.11),
under such a transformation the matter action undergoes the change

                  3 fd4x&M        = - I d4x                 .     (31.5.11)
                                            (>(x)^a(x))

Inspection of Eq. (31.2.17)shows that thischange in the action iscancelled
if we add an inhomogeneous term (2/K)3^a(x) to the right-hand side of
Eq. (31.5.3),so that the change in the gravitino fieldis now

      Stp^x) = (2/K)dp*(x)+ [i[yv, yx]dxhp(x) + dphxx(x) + 2iy5bp(x)

                 -13iy»yPy5bp(x)+      f)vs(x)- f iy^sPtoJaM.     (31.5.12)

  It is useful to rewrite Eq. (31.5.12)in a form that makes the
        to general coordinates more transparent. First,we note that the
generalization
term d^w     on the right-hand side of Eq. (31.5.12)may be eliminated by
replacing the parameter a(x) with
                       8 = (Detg)1/4a - a + iicfe^a.              (31.5.13)

Dropping the tilde,to zeroth order in k Eq. (31.5.12)then becomes

      dxp^x) = (2/fc)5Ma(x)+ [±[yv, yx] d^h^x)     + liysb^x)

                  -]iy^pysb(,{x)+      \y»s{x)- §fy^sp(*)]a(x).   (31.5.14)
                        31.6 Supergravity to All Orders                  343

We can express thisin terms of the covariant derivativeof a(x),which in
general coordinates takes the form
                            = VW  + i*/*c<(*)«(*),          (31.5.15)
                   D^{x)
where fbc is the matrix (5.4.6)representing the generator of Lorentz
transformations in the Dirac representation

                                               , /] ,                (31.5.16)
                                         4
and (DbJ(x)isthe spin connection,

            = *x                               -
       <           «%   SXV = *x         gAv       rpv,e\ e% g"v .   (31.5.17)
                                   ||f
Using the weak field approximations (31.1.5),(31.1.10),and (31.1.11),
together with the gauge condition <^v = 0V/*>and in this approximation
again ignoring the differencebetween local Lorentz indices a, b, etc.and
space time indices/x,v, etc.,this gives
                  ~
           D^(x)     d^ix) + ifc[yv,yx]d^v(x) a(x).             (31.5.18)
Thus the localsupersymmetry transformation rule (31.5.12)may be written
                                             -
           Stppix)= (2/fc)DMa(x)+ [2iy5 b^x)   \iy^ypysbp(x)
                         + ±y,s(x)-                             (31.5.19)
                                    fiW5P(x)]a(x).
We see that in Wess-Zumino gauge the derivativesin the supersymmetry
transformation become covariant derivatives.In this sense, the approach
outlined here is similar to the de Wit-Freedman approach to supersym-
metric gauge theories,described in Section 27.8.
  The transformation v^(x) —► i/^(x)+ (2/jc)3Ma(x)is a gauge
transformation
        of the same type as Eq. (31.1.13),so it leaves the zeroth-order
gravitino action — {J d4x(\pflL^i) invariant. The whole action obtained
from the Lagrangian density (31.2.15)is thereforeinvariant to order zero
in k under the local supersymmetry transformations (31.5.2),(31.5.4)-
        (31.5.12)(or (31.5.19))and matter superfieldtransformations like
(31.5.6),
(26.7.15).We conclude that the combination of gravitationand
      automaticallyleads to localsupersymmetry.
supersymmetry


                   31.6     Supergravity to All Orders

Although the action derived from the Lagrangian density (31.2.15) is
invariant to zeroth order in k = j$nG under the local supersymmetry
transformations constructed in Sections 26.7 and 31.5, itis not invariant
to firstorder in k, because the interactionof matter with the gravitational
344                                     31 Supergravity

supermultiplet introduces terms of order k in d^. To make possible the
invariance of the fullaction,we willhave to add terms of higher order in
k to the Lagrangian and to the supersymmetry transformation rules for
the components of both the matter and the gravitationalsupermultiplets.
This can be done by firstadding terms of higher order in k to the
transformation rules,chosen so that these transformations form a closed
algebra along with local Lorentz transformations and general coordinate
transformations, and then adding terms to the action to make itinvariant
under allthese transformations.
  This isa long and tedious process. Here we shallgive only the results,12
and then turn in the next section to what has been theirmost important
application. The local supersymmetry transformation of the vierbein,
gravitino field,and auxiliaryfieldstakes the form:

      de% = K{ayaipfl),                                    (31.6.1)
          =                   -                 -
      d\pn {2/k)D^(x+ 2iy5 (b^ \ynypbp)a + fy^s   iy5p)oc, (31.6.2)

        Ss = 1                  +             [jy5bv-syv-                   ,     (31.6.3)
                   (a^L")           \ (a                         ipysf]^)




              +i                - iysp) - i                     •                 (31.6.5)
                   2 (vWs(s            a)   ^e^VKCbv (a ysyKtp0>)
Here D^ is again the covariant derivativegiven by (31.5.15)and (31.5.16):

                            ^       =                                             (31.6.6)
                                         aM+i[ya,yfc]<,
but now with the spin connection including terms bilinearin the gravitino
field



         +                              + e%ebp              - e%                -(31.6.7)
             1J [**v(Wv)                           (v>vv/)            (?„? V)]
Also, LP isthe covariant version of the Rarita-Schwinger operator (31.2.8)
                                1/ = iysyvDptpeeW            ,                    (31.6.8)

yM isdefined in terms of the usual Dirac matrices ya as
                                              =                                   (31.6.9)
                                         y„       e%ya,
and e is here the determinant of the vierbein

                                         e = y/Dotg .                            (31.6.10)
                          31.6 Supergravity to All Orders                             345

It is easy to see that these transformation rules reduce in the weak field
limitto Eqs. (31.5.2), (31.5.19),and (31.5.4)-(31.5.6).
   The action for pure supergravity that is invariant under these
             and that reduces to the form (31.2.9)in the weak fieldlimit,
transformations,
is

    /sugra =                               ~                       + P2-
                   /d4x       [~^R              \ (</VU1) ~j{s2            M")]
                                                             (31.6.11)
where R is the curvature scalar, calculated using the spin connection
(31.6.7).In the absence of matter, the action would be stationary for
s = p = b^ = 0, leaving us with the simpler action

                    /sugra =
                                     Jd4x       j-^jK-      l-(vvI/1)]
  The transformation of matter fieldsis also now more complicated. For
the components of a general scalar supermultiplet,these are

       5C =
             i(ay5o>) ,                                                           (31.6.12)
       dco = [-iy5&C-M                + iy5N+ f]a ,                               (31.6.13)
      SM     = -                       +              -    +
                    (a [X+ 0a>])            y    (a [s iy5p iy5 Jf\to) ,          (31.6.14)

      SN = i                      +                     -    +
                   (ay5 [A+ $><o\) -^              (a [s iy5p iy5 W 7s <o) , (31.6.15)
                          +                 + -        -    +
      SVa=     (oqvl)         (a^aco)             (a [s iy5p iy5 0] yaco) , (31.6.16)

       SX = ~[ya,yb]ocFab              + iDy5«,                                   (31.6.17)

       <5D =                    ,                                                 (31.6.18)
               i(ay5$u)
where the covariant derivativeshere are

                                                                                  (31.6.19)
             kiC-y(vvy5<»)
                    1
   2a(o = e/ d^ai + -cof [yc,yb]o)- iKb^y5<o
                    8

                                                     +                            (31.6.20)
                    -x(f-iy5^C-M                         Jy5JV)W

    ^aA = e/        df^ + ^Khc,yb\h
                                    \C               IK
                                                   - — y5D
                     +i k b^ y5 A + - [yb,yc]v>MFfcc                              (31.6.21)
                                                           y„

     fab — &a &b                         - -
                       dfiVv+ ^dy (xpf,<u)   (tpyyv A)              -a++b,        (31.6.22)
346                            31 Super gravity

with V^ = ea^Va. The rules for multiplying general scalar multiplets are
                                   except that 3M is everywhere replaced
the same as Eqs. (26.2.19)-(26.2.25),
with 3>a,so that the components of a supermultiplet S = S\S2 are

      C = CiC2,                                                   (31.6.23)
      co = Ci(o2 + C2coi ,                                        (31.6.24)
      M = C\M2 + C2Mi + \i{lo{ys
                                 co2) ,                           (31.6.25)

      N = CXN2 + C2NX - i
                             (corco2) ,                          (31.6.26)

      v° = cxv$ + c2v{ -                                         (31.6.27)
                            {i(rniysyaco2),
      A =  CM2 + C2k{  -            -
                         \yam2aC2       \ya(o2@aCi + \i fiys <o2
           + \i Mils m + t(N1-iy5M1)a)2+      {(N2-iy5M2)(Di,    (31.6.28)
      D  =  -2aCx 2aC2 + CiD2 + C2Di + M{M2 + N{N2

          -(m    [k2 + i pco2]) - (oT2[kx + i pcoS) - VUV$    .   (31.6.29)

  Just as in flat space, there are supersymmetric constraints that can
be imposed on these general supermultiplets. One such constraint is
reality.Inspection of Eqs. (31.6.12)-(31.6.22)
                                             together with Eqs. (26.A.20)-
(26.A.21) shows that if C, M, AT,Va, D, co,and k form a supermultiplet S,
then C*, M*, AT, Ka*,£)*,peysco*,and peysk* are also the components of
a supermultiplet,calledS*. In particular,a rea/ supermultiplet isone with
S = S*, so that C, M, AT, 7fl,and D are real and co and k are Majorana
spinors.
  We can also impose a supersymmetric condition of chirality.Suppose
we set

           A = 0,     D = 0,
                                   ±k(v>vco) =dvZ ,
                                 Fv+                           (31.6.30)

for some fieldZ. Then Eq. (31.6.22)gives Fat = 0, so Eq. (31.6.17)shows
that dk = 0, while Eq. (31.6.21)gives 2ak = 0, so Eq. (31.6.18)shows
that 3D = 0. The conditions k = D = 0 are therefore preserved by local
supersymmetry transformations. With a littlemore work one can show
that
                      d \vv + {k (xpv    =
                                     co)] dv (aco) ,              (31.6.31)

so the remaining condition, that Vv + \k (\pvcoJ is a spacetime gradient,
is also supersymmetric. A supermultiplet of component fieldssatisfying
Eq. (31.6.30)is said to be chiral. Just as in the case of global super-
symmetry, the components of a chiral supermultiplet are conventionally
renamed as A, B, xp9F, and G, defined by

  C=A,          a) = -iy5xp,   M = G,      N = -F,     Z=B.       (31.6.32)
                        31.6 Supergravity to All Orders                         347

A chiral supermultiplet is real if A, B, F, and G are real and \p is a
Majorana spinor. Such a real chiral supermultiplet can be written as the
sum of a left-chiralsupermultiplet O, with components conventionally
defined by

            A + iB                                        F-iG
     <*>=                 V>L                       ^ =                     (31.6.33)
                                                              V2
and itscomplex conjugate, a right-chiralsupermultiplet.From these
definitions                      and (31.6.31)we see that the components
      and Eqs. (31.6.12)—(31.6.15)
of a left-chiral
               supermultiplet have the transformation properties

                d(/>= V2(aipL) ,                                            (31.6.34)

               S\fL = <s/5(00)a*- icy*1         +
                                      (tpptpL)oiR V^*l     ,                (31.6.35)

               <5J^ =             - 2k    [s- ip - iV]\pL) ,                (31.6.36)
                      V2(a $tyL)    y (a
with 2)a\pgiven by Eqs. (31.6.20)and (31.6.32).The rules for
    left-chiralsupermultiplets are the same as the corresponding rules
multiplying
(26.3.27)-(26.3.29)in the case of global supersymmetry: The product of
          supermultipletsQ>\and Q>2isa left-chiral
left-chiral                                       supermultiplet denoted
      with
<I>i<I>2> components

                       (j)= 0!02 ,                                          (31.6.37)
                      WL = <l>lV2L+ <l>2VlL,                                (31.6.38)
                                                                            (31.6.39)

  Now we must consider how to construct actions that are invariant
under local supersymmetry transformations as well as general coordinate
transformations and local Lorentz transformations. Eqs. (31.6.18)and
(31.6.21)show that the change under a supersymmetry transformation
of the D-component of a general supermultiplet S is no longer simply a
spacetime derivative,so the integralof such a D-component isnot suitable
as a term in the action. Instead, from an arbitrary superfieldS we can
form a density whose integralis supersymmetric


    [S]d = e     Ds
                      -^(ry^S)
                                       +
                                           ^[sNs       +PMS        -b»V*]


                 -i(^y5A)-^^0T^(wr^)

                 ——€Wax                                                     (31.6.40)
                            (<usw)(wtvv)           -^CsifsuGRA,
348                                 31 Supergravity

where J£?sugra is the supergravity Lagrangian density in Eq. (31.6.11):

      ^sugra    =            -                ~               + p2 -           .   (31.6.41)
                    ~^R          \ (v/iU1)         y   (s2             bpbP)
Likewise, Eqs. (31.6.36)and (31.6.20)show that the change under a super-
symmetry transformation of the ^-component      of a left-chiral
                                                               superfield
X is not a spacetime derivative,so terms must be added to thisJ^-term
to form a density whose integralis supersymmetric:
                                                          2
        [X]^ = e


                          +2k(s - ip)(j)x                                          (31.6.42)

  There are some supermultiplets of specialphysical interest.One is the
realnon-chiral supermultiplet I whose only non-zero component isC = 1.
According to Eq. (31.6.40),this supermultiplet has
                                            2k1
                                 [lb =                         ,                   (31.6.43)
                                         —y^suGRA
so this gives nothing new.
  A more interestingexample is provided by a left-chiral
                                                       supermultiplet I
whose only non-zero component is (j)= 1. According to Eq. (31.6.42),this
supermultiplet has
                                 K /             \
               Re DOjr = e                                                         (31.6.44)
                                 -j{wn[y^yv]wv)+4Ks

If a term c/d4xRe[I]jr appears in the Lagrangian density with a real
coefficientc,then the sum of thisterm and the supergravity action (31.6.11)
is stationary with respect to variation of auxiliaryfieldsat

                           5 = 3ck/2,             p = ^ = 0,                       (31.6.45)
so that after eliminating the auxiliary fields,the action will contain a
cosmological constant term

                                                  d4xe,                            (31.6.46)
                                     :*tj
corresponding to a vacuum energy density — 3k2c2. Such a term is
needed to keep the vacuum stateLorentz-invariant when supersymmetry
is spontaneously broken; to cancel the positive vacuum energy density
F2/2 associated with supersymmetry breaking, we must take
                                    3k2c2 = F2/2.                                  (31.6.47)
                     31.6 Supergravity to All Orders                       349

Looking back at Eq. (31.6.44)and comparing with Eq. (31.3.11),we see
that thisgives a gravitino mass13

                               2  Fk      4nGF2                 .,,,.„
                     m.** = ck1 = —= = \ —-—,                  (31.6.48)
                                  V6"V       3
in agreement with our previous result(31.3.17).
  As an illustrationof the use of these formulas that will also provide
resultsneeded in the next section,letus calculatethe bosonic part of the
Lagrangian density*
         2 = ^sugra + HK(*>**)1d + 2Re [/(*)> ,                (31.6.49)
where if sugra is here the bosonic part of the supergravity Lagrangian
density (31.6.41),X(0,0*) is a real function of a set of left-chiral
                                                                   super-
multipletsOn and theircomplex conjugates, and /(O) isa function of the
On alone. The purely bosonic terms in the multiplicationrules (31.6.23),
                   and (31.6.29)are the same as in global supersymmetry,
(31.6.25)—(31.6.27),
so we can use eitherthese rulesor the superspace formalism of Chapter 26
to calculatethat the supermultipletX(0,0*) has the bosonic components
     CK =K((j), (/>*),                                                (31.6.50)

                                                                      (31.6.51)
    ^=-2ImE(^^^)+--,

    ^    =                                                            (31.6.52)
             -2ReE(^^^)+'--,

                                                                      (3L6.53)
     ^=2Im£(^^

     DK = 2 £                        Wn   d^m    + ^           + ••. , (31.6.54)
                  8-^jP        h"V                     3F*m)

where the dots indicate terms involving fermion fields.Also, the rules
                                            supermultiplets are the same
                  for multiplying left-chiral
(31.6.37)—(31.6.39)
as those in global supersymmetry, so we can use either these rules or
the superfieldformalism of Chapter 26 to calculate that the left-chiral
supermultiplet/(O) has the bosonic components
                          </>'=/(</>),                                (31.6.55)
                          ^/ =                  + -'                  (31-6-56)
                                 E^r^ 8<l>n
                                  n

*Often the term if
                  sugra is omitted,with the supergravity Lagrangianintroduced
 insteadby including a constantterm — 3/k2 in X(0,0*). We willnot followthis
 practice;here,with a conventionalnormalization                   the term in
                                                of the scalarfields,
 K(0,0*) of leadingorderink is^ |#„|2.
350                                  31 Supergravity

with dots again indicatingterms involving fermions. Insertingthese results
into Eqs. (31.6.40) and (31.6.42) then gives the bosonic terms of the
Lagrangian density (31.6.49)as

        ^bo
                        -&*-±(w-wj                                1-yKOM*)




                    +                                        + ip)+
                         nrRe         d~^P       ^n(s                   m"+*)
                                ?

                    +                            + 2K(s-ip)f(<f>)\ .            (31.6.57)
                        2eRe(Y,^^&n
  Now we must eliminate the auxiliary fieldsby setting them at values
where the Lagrangian density is stationary.** This gives the auxiliary
fields


        '-£?(M.&(-E(n,£(&)'+v)




      -*-£(-i:(n,£(&)'+v).

         "' -                                            '                      (3'-6'60)
                2(1-kW*              (?    3£*'*")
where
                                -2        -2 —   -   -       dK    dK
                    ^='-TK+jS(n
                             3                       Jktdfodfi
                                          3^V
and g(4>,4>*)is the Kahler metric




**
  Though thisprocedureisgenerally  followed,itisnot strictly     foreven though
                                                          correct,
  theLagrangiandensity  isquadraticintheauxiliary      thecoefficients
                                                  fields,            oftheterms
  of secondorderin the auxiliary       are not field-independent.
                                  fields                         In consequence,
  in doing the path integration over auxiliaryfieldswe encounterdeterminantsof
                of the quadraticterms,which are equivalent
  thecoefficients                                          to addingtermsto the
  Lagrangianproportional          = (2n)~4J d4k1.Such termscan be eliminated
                          to <54(0)                                          by
  usingdimensional               forwhich J dAk1 = 0.
                   regularization,
                              31.6 Supergravity to All Orders                                              351

Using thisin Eq. (31.6.57)gives the bosonic Lagrangian

     ^bosonic —       9 2       '-T*                    run
                                                                     i2
                      evr2                    df dK
                  +                               7-3/
                      3N     £(*-')      nmd<l)md<l)*n
                              e*r
                                         Im                               Im                           ryf>V
                      3(1-     k2K/3)              ?i^"                            nd<t>n

                                                                                                     (31.6.62)
                       t^V          )nmd(j>m\d(i>n)
  As already noted in the weak fieldcase in Section 31.2,the Lagrangian
density (31.6.62)has the uncomfortable feature that the Einstein-Hilbert
term —eR/2K2 is multiplied with a factor (1 — fc2K(0,0*)/3), so that the
effectivegravitationalconstant varies from point to point in spacetime.
To remedy this,we perform a Weyl transformation, defining a new metric
by
                                               -
                                    gMV = (l
                                   k3K/3) g/iV
                                                .               (31.6.63)
The Einstein Lagrangian density is given in terms of the new metric by

                                                                In        -            In        -
eg^R,v =(l-                          ~erv U,v        +
                                                          \d.        (l        y )dv        (l       j))
                                                                                                            ,
                        jKJ
where R^ isthe curvature tensor calculated using a metric g^v in place of
g^v,and e = ^/Detg. A straightforward calculationthen gives the bosonic
Lagrangian (31.6.62)as

         ^bosonic —          9 2^       ^v
                                                                              -1
                                                                                   d2K
                                                           i-\k
                                                                -2
                                       vr                            dK       dK
                                     +-
                                              l-'jK                  d(j)n
                                                                         d<j)*m
                                                   -2
                             etc*                                            df dK
                                                          £(*"')                   7-3/
                                                                          nmd(j)md(j)*n
                                              -2
                                                                       df f df


The Weyl transformation has not only removed the factor (1 — k2K/3)
352                              31 Supergravity

from the Einstein-Hilbert term; ithas also eliminated terms proportional
to dM$„dv0m and d^d^m-
  This resultmay be further simplifiedby introducing a modified Kahler
                 in place of K($,</>*),which we define by
potentiald{<f>,(j>*)
                                 -2          <   K2d\
                                                                     (31.6.65)

We also introduce a new metric on the scalarfieldspace
                                         d2d
                                 gnm — -,, -,,» •                    (31.6.66)

The reciprocalsof the new and old metrics are related by

                     v-i K2     Emn g7ng£W/d<ptt) (dd/dfa)
  ^=exp(K^/3)       S7k + 3 1 -
                                 (k2/3)£m„ gj(dd/d<l>n) (dd/d</>*m)\
The bosonic Lagrangian density (31.6.64)now takes the simpler form

      ^bosonic = -          ^v
                                  ~ l^                     -
                                           z2 gnmdp<f>„dv<l>*meV ,   (31.6.67)
                     2^fv                  nm
              isthe potential
where ¥((/),(/)*)

                 V = Qxp(K2d) / vSnm Lfii-Li** «J(v
                                                  2\f\2              (31.6.68)

and
                                      df
                            L*m —     Wf-dd      '               (31.6.69)
                                 d(j)m      d<j>m
  The potential(31.6.68)has an obvious stationarypoint at fieldstrengths
satisfyingthe condition Lm = 0. However, as we found in the weak field
case, at this point the vacuum energy in general takes the negative value
—3fc2|/|2.To have the stationary point Lm = 0 give a solution with flat
space, itis necessary that both f((j>)
                                     and df(<l>)/d<l>n
                                                    should vanish at these
fieldvalues. Inspection of Eqs. (31.6.58) and (31.6.59)shows that the
scalar auxiliary fieldsJ%, 5, and p vanish for such fieldvalues, so that
the vacuum expectation values of the variations (31.6.2)and (31.6.35)of
the gravitino and chiral spinor fieldsunder global supersymmetry
             with constant a vanish. Thus a vacuum fieldvalue for which
transformations
f((j))and              all vanish is one for which global supersymmetry
           df(<l>)/d<l>n
is unbroken in the classicallimit. In the next section we shall consider
vacuum configurations in which supersymmetry isbroken.
  We will not show it here, but the additional terms in the bosonic
Lagrangian required by the inclusion of gauge superfieldsare unaffected
by gravitation,aside from an over-alldeterminantal factor e and metric
                      31.6 Supergravity to All Orders                     353

factorsneeded to raise and lower indices.After elimination of auxiliary
fieldsand a Weyl transformation, the complete bosonic Lagrangian for a
theory with gauge as well as chiraland gravitationalsuperfieldsis

   ^bosonic/? = - A     *%
                             -
                                 E SnmD^nD^
                                                   -
                                                       J £ RtfAB F*FBI»
                                 nm                      AB
                - i                           - V .                (31.6.70)
                      £ lmfAB F*F*,eVP°
                      AB
Here Z)^, F^v, and ^ denote the gauge-covariant derivatives,the field-
strength tensors,and the representativesof the gauge generators on the
chiralscalar superfields,using the notation described in Section 15.1;jab
is an independent holomorphic function of the (j)n;  all spacetime indices
are raised and lowered with g^v; and the potential V now takes the form

   V = exp(K2d) l^gnmLmK         - 3fC2|/|2
                L nm                     J

                                                                  • pi*")
       4*     £^        (£&<">-*»)            (e   &«**)'
  The form (31.6.71)of the bosonic potential is simple enough to make
itapparent that terms in d that depend only on <f>nor only on 0* may be
                                                        ifwe write
traded for correctionsto the superpotential.Specifically,

   d{<j>^) = d{<t>A*)+ a{(j>)
                            + a{(j>r,       =
                                       f((/>) /(</>)exp(-K2<#)) ,
                                                              (31.6.72)
          an arbitraryholomorphic function satisfyingthe gauge invari-
with a((j))
ance condition

                                         =
                          2^ q± {tA)nm(Pm 0 ,
                          nm V(Pn
then the potential(31.6.71)takes the same form in terms of d and / as it
did in terms of d and /. With a suitableredefinitionof the superpotential,
we can then eliminate any terms in the power seriesexpansion of d((j),(j)*)
that depend only on (j)nor only on 0*. With this understanding, the
leading term in the power seriesexpansion of d(0,0*) (now dropping the
                                    By a suitablelineartransformation of
tilde)is of the form ]T)nmdnm(j)n(l)m.
the superfields,we can then make the matrix dnm equal to <5nm,so that the
power seriesexpansion of d{(j),(j)*)
                                   begins
                                =            --- ,
                        ^,<n       £l<£n|2 +                     (31.6.73)
                                    n
and the power seriesexpansion of the metric (31.6.66)begins
                                       -- •
                           gnm = Snm +                             (31.6.74)
354                           31 Supergravity

Inspection of the second term on the right-hand side of Eq. (31.6.67)shows
that the scalarfieldsdefined in this way are canonically normalized.
  The fermion terms are much more complicated. Here we will quote
only the terms quadratic in the gaugino fields

  (2)
& gaugino
                       AB

                            Re
              +\ exp(fc2d/2) £ £ g^Lm             (^f)     (lAXB) ,(31.6.75)
                               mn AB
with Lm given by Eq. (31.6.69). We see that if the gauge fieldsare
canonically normalized, then the constant term in the expansion of the
function /ab in powers of the scalar fieldsis Sab, and then the gaugino
fieldsXa are also canonically normalized.
                                  * * *
  Instead of moving all the holomorphic terms in d(0,0*) and their
complex conjugates into the superpotential,we can use the transformation
(31.6.72)to make the new superpotentialf((j)) equal to a constant, which
can be chosen to be equal to unity,by taking a{(j>) = —k~2 In /($). The
potential then depends only on the function

                 WW)        = dW)      + 2fc"2Re ln/(0),           (31.6.76)
and takes the form

  V = exp(fc2^) 'm
                             (£)(£)*-">


       +ke^/jif^^(^)nm^m) ~^n                  (j2^(tB)kicl>)    .(31.6.77)
              AB     \nm d(f)n            /    \ kl d(j)k
Also, the metric (31.6.66)for the scalarfieldsmay be written
                                       d22)
                             Snm —                                 (31.6.78)
                                     d<t>n
                                         50m
Although we have not shown it here, the symmetry that allows us to
replace the Kahler potential and superpotential with the single function
         also allows us to make thisreplacement in the whole Lagrangian,
Q){§,</>*)
including allterms involving fermions and gauge fields.
  There is an interestingclass of 'no-scale'theories,13ain which the
       V vanishes for allvalues of </>m.
potential                              For instance,thisis the case for a
singlegauge-neutral chiralscalar superfield,with

                       0 = -3iT2 In                                (31.6.79)
                                      (M^)+    *#)*),
             31.7 Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking             355

where h((j))
           isan arbitraryfunction of (j).
                                        But there is no known    principle
that would require 3f to take thisform.



         31.7   Gravity-Mediated    Supersymmetry     Breaking

We now take up again the problem of supersymmetry breaking. As
discussed at the beginning of Chapter 28, ifsupersymmetry isto be of use
in solving the hierarchy problem — that is,in understanding the large ratio
of the Planck mass mpi = 1/^SnG to the mass scaleof observed particles
— then
         supersymmetry must be unbroken at the Planck scale,and broken
spontaneously only at some much lower mass scale.The only plausible
mechanism known that would naturally produce a very large ratio of
mass scales is the non-perturbative effectof asymptotically free gauge
interactions.If these interactionsare moderately weak at the Planck scale
then their slow growth with decreasing energy will make them become
strong at a much lower scale A < mpi. The known elementary particles
do not feelsuch strong forces,so whatever supersymmetry breakdown is
produced directlyor indirectlyby these strong gauge interactionsmust
be communicated to the observed particlesby some interactionin which
they do participate.
   In Section 28.3 we noted two possible mechanisms for communicating
the breakdown of supersymmetry to observable particles.    One mechanism,
gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking, was discussed in detailin
     28.6.We are now ready to consider the other mechanism, mediation
Section
of supersymmetry breaking by effectsof gravitationalstrength.
   In the early 1980s, when gravitationwas firstconsidered as the mediator
of supersymmetry breaking,14 it was generally assumed that the super-
potential consisted of two terms: a function /(O) of various left-chiral
superfieldsOr of an observable sector,including allthe superfieldsof
observableparticles,plus a function /(Z) of various left-chiral
                                                              superfieldsZ&
of a hidden sector,15allof which are neutral under the SU(3)xSU(2)xU(l)
gauge group of the standard model. Further, the superpotential of the
hidden sectorwas assumed to take the form

                            7(Z) = 63F(fcZ),                      (31.7.1)
where e is some mass that is much lessthan the Planck mass, and F(kZ)
is a power seriesin kZ with coefficientsof order unity. The assumption
that the total superpotential should be a sum /(O) + /(Z) is somewhat
arbitrary but, as we shall see, it is not difficult o think of reasons why
this should be at least approximately true. A more serious criticismof
this approach is that it did not offer any hope of solving the hierarchy
356                         31 Supergravity

problem; the energy e was simply assumed to be much less than the
Planck mass.
  After the development of these firstmodels of gravity-mediated super-
symmetry breaking there appeared other models in which the hierarchy
of energy scalesis explained naturally,in terms of the slow growth with
decreasing energy of a gauge coupling which becomes strong at an energy
A < mpi. These models come in two versions that are distinguished by
differentassumptions regarding the source of supersymmetry breaking. As
we shallsee,in both versions the squarks and sleptonsget supersymmetry-
breaking masses of the order of the gravitino mass mg, but they differin
the formula for mg; in the firstversion mg « jcA2, while in the second
version mg « jc2A3,giving A « 1011 GeV and A « 1013 GeV, respectively.
The two versions willturn out also to differin the formulas for other soft
supersymmetry-breaking parameters, including B/i,the ^-parameters, and
the gaugino masses.



                            First Version16

In thisversion of gravity-mediated supersymmetry breaking itisassumed
that the superfieldsof the theory fallinto two sectors:

Observable Sector: These are the superfieldsof the minimum supersym-
metric standard model: the 517(3) x 517(2) x 17(1)gauge superfields
       with the quark, antiquark, lepton,antilepton,and Higgs left-chiral
together
superfieldswhich we will genericallycallOr.
Hidden Sector: These are gauge superfields of an asymptotically free
gauge interactionthat becomes strong at an intermediate energy scale A
with mw < A < mpi, together with left-chiralsuperfieldsZ& that feelthis
gauge interaction.

  The Zk must be assumed to be neutral under the 5(7(3) x 5(7(2) x (7(1)
gauge group, since otherwise we would be back in the case of gauge-
mediated supersymmetry breaking. Also, we know enough about the
observable sector to be sure that its chiral superfieldsdo not feel the
gauge interactionsof the hidden sector.
  In order naturally to have the renormalizable part of the totalsuperpo-
tentialof the form /(O) + /(Z), we can assume that the symmetries that
survive below the Planck scaleinclude a group Gh (which may be part of
the gauge group of the hidden sector),under which allof the fieldsof the
observable sectorand none of the fieldsof the hidden sectorare invariant,
and a group Go (which may be part of the 517(3) x 517(2) x 17(1)gauge
group of the observable sector),under which allof the fieldsof the hidden
             31.7 Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking            357

sectorand none of the fieldsof the observable sectorare invariant.In this
case ifany observable sectorfieldsappear in a term of the superpotential
then theremust be at leasttwo of them, and also ifany hidden sectorfields
appear in a term of the superpotential then there must be at leasttwo of
them, so there can be no term in a cubic polynomial superpotential that
involves both hidden and observable sector fields.This argument leaves
open the possibilityof non-renormalizable terms in the superpotential
that involve two or more factors of both hidden and observable sector
superfields,a possibilityto which we will return later.Of course, we are
assuming that the strong interactionsof the hidden sector produce
additional
        non-perturbative terms in the totalhidden sector superpotential
/(Z), but these too depend only on the hidden sector superfields.
  Assuming then that the superpotential takes the form /(0)+/(Z),
the potential of the scalar components of these superfieldsis given by
Eq. (31.6.71)as




       +E^(|+^+7)Q(|wa+7)|)'


       -3k2|/+/|2




              M                                                  01.7.2)
       4Re            (E   £W)          (£   £W)'

In writing the terms arisingfrom gauge interactions,we are assuming here
that there isno mixing of the gauge bosons of the hidden and observable
sectors— that is,f^ vanishes for any pair of gauge generators tA and
£b, for which tA acts non-triviallyon the (j)rand tg acts non-triviallyon
the z/c,or vice-versa.
  We are interestedin exploring a region of fieldspace where the scalar
fieldsz/cof the hidden sector are of order A, the variable part of the
superpotential/(z) of the hidden sectorisof order A3, and, on dimensional
grounds, df/dzk isof order A2. We willleave the magnitude of the constant
part of / open for the moment; as we shallsee,we must include a constant
358                              31 Supergravity

term in / that ismuch larger than A3 in order to cancel the cosmological
constant.
   We further define the region of field space to be explored as one in
which the fields(j)rof the observable sector are of order kA2 because, as
we shall see,thisis the characteristicmass scale arisingin the observable
sectorfrom gravitationaleffectsof supersymmetry breaking in the hidden
sector.The observable sector superpotential /($) for fieldsof order kA2
is assumed to be of order jc3A6,and itsderivativesdf(<l>)/d<l>r are taken
to be of order k2A4.
   In consequence of the definitionof the superpotential and the scalar
fieldsdiscussed at the end of the previous section, and the symmetry
Gh x Go assumed above, the modified Kahler potential takes the form*
    rf(0,0*,z,z*)= £            + £ \zk\2+ 0{k2z*2z2)
                           \c/>r\2
                       r           k
                    +0(k2z*z3) + 0(k2z*3z) + 0{K2<t>*2z2)+ O(kVVz)
                    +0{K2Z*2(j)2)+ 0{K2Z*Z(j)2)+ 0{K2<t>*<t>Z2)
                                  + O(fc20*z>z) + 0{K2<t>*2<t>2)
                    +0{K2z*2<t>*<j))
                    +O(kV03)    + 0{k2^4>) + ••• ,               (31.7.3)
with dots indicating terms of higher order. The metric (31.6.66)then has
components
grs = $rs+ 0(K2Z2) + 0(fcV2) + O(fcVz)
                           + O(fc20» + ••• ,
      +0{k2(J>2)+ 0(K2(f)*2)                                           (31.7.4)
gkl = skl+ 0(fc2z2)+ 0(kV2) + O(kVz)
                           + O(fc20» + ••• ,
      +0(K2(f>2)+ 0(K2(f)*2)                                           (31.7.5)
grk = g*kr= 0(K2(f)z*)+ 0{K2<j>z)+ 0(K2(f)*z*)+ O(kVz)       + ••• .   (31.7.6)
(The characteristicenergy scalein d isassumed to be 1/fc,because d isthe
modified Kahler potentialproduced by unknown dynamical effectsat the
Planck scale,in contrast with /, which gets itsstructurefrom dynamical
effectsof the strong gauge couplings at scale A.) The grs and gki are
genericallyof order unity,while the mixed components grk and gkr are of
order of k2(k:A2)A = fc3A3 < 1. It follows that the same is also true of
the components of g_1: {g~x)rsand {g~x)kiare genericallyof order unity,
while the {g~x)rkand {g~x)kr are of order of fc3A3 < 1.
  It follows from these estimates that unless cancellationsintervene the
dominant terms in the potential(31.7.2)willbe at leastof order A4, and

*                is meant a term of the form K2^2kimnCkimnzlzJzmzn
                                                                with constant
    By 0(k2z*2z2)
              Q/wm of orderunity,and likewise
    coefficients                             forthe othertermsin Eqs.(31.7.3)-
    (31.7.6).
                31.7 Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking              359

take the form

                                               df
                                                     -3k2    7°        (31.7.7)
                                       k       dzk

with 7° the constant term in f, which willbe needed to cancel the vacuum
energy. We assume that supersymmetry is spontaneously broken in the
hidden sector,which requiresthat there isa point z\ at which J2k \df/dzk\2
is at leasta local minimum, but not zero. Then in order to cancel the
vacuum energy to this order, we must take
                                           ^\ 0 i2
                         3fc2              =                           (31.7.8)
                                 f°\           £

the superscript 0 on the right-hand side indicating that the quantity is
to be evaluated at z = z°. Hence 7° must be given an anomalously
large value, of order A2/k. This is a more extreme fine tuning than will
turn out to be necessary in the second version of gravitationallymediated
supersymmetry breaking but, in the absence of a real understanding of the
cosmological constant, some fine tuning will be necessary in any theory
of supersymmetry breaking.
  We can calculatethe supersymmetry-breaking parameter F in our
      (31.3.17)for the gravitino mass by settingthe vacuum energy density
formula
F2/2 equal to the flat-spacevalue ^2k \(df/dzk)0\2.The gravitino mass is
then given by Eqs. (31.3.17)and (31.7.8)as


                                               dm
                    mQ = k       \E
                                                            = K   f"   (31.7.9)
                             N
This is of the same order      fcA2 as the scalar fieldsof the observable
sector.
  Now let us turn to the terms in Eq. (31.7.2)that do depend on the
observable sector scalars 0r. We are considering fieldvalues for which
the usual supersymmetric term £r |3//30r|2 is of order m* « fc4A8, so
we have to collectall ^-dependent terms in Eq. (31.7.2)of this order or
greater.Let us look in turn at each of the six lineson the right-hand side
of Eq. (31.7.2).
  The leading term in K2(f + f)dd/d<f)ris K2f°(f)*,which like df/d<f)ris
                        = jc2A4,while other terms in K2(f + f)dd/d(j)rare
of order fc2(A2/fc)(fcA2)
much smaller.  To   leading order we can approximate exp(fc2d)by unity
and g"1 by <5rs,so in thisorder the firstlineof Eq. (31.7.2)gives
360                         31 Supergravity

This is of the desired order jc4A8, so it is not necessary to consider
higher-order corrections.
  The leading term in g~k{ is of order k3A3; the leading term in df/dzk
is of order A2, while K2(f + f)dd/dzk is smaller, of order jcA3; and
we have seen that the leading term in df/d$r + K2(f + f)dd/d(f)ris of
order jc2A4, so the term on the second line of Eq. (31.7.2)is of order
(fc3A3)(A2)(fc2A4)= fc5A9,which may be neglected in comparison with the
terms in Eq. (31.7.2)of order k4A8.
  The leading terms in the third and fourth linesof Eq. (31.7.2)are of
order A4, but these are independent of 0r. There is a 0 dependence
coming from the terms on the third line involving /; the leading terms of
thissort are 2fc2Re[/ Ekzk(df/dzkTl    which are of order k5A9 < k4A8,
and hence may be neglected. Also, there is a 0 dependence arising from
the terms on the fourth lineof Eq. (31.7.2)involving /. The leading terms
of thissort are

                             -6fc2Re[f/0*]
which are of order fc2(fcA2)3A2/fc= jc4A8. The factor exp(fc2d)contains
^-dependent terms of order k2(k:A2)2,but these multiply a potential
whose leading terms (31.7.7)have been adjusted to cancel to order A4,
so the ^-dependent terms arising from thissource are much lessthan of
order fc4A8. There is one other type of ^-dependent term, arising from
the ^-dependent terms in g^1. According to Eqs. (31.7.4)—(31.7.6), these
terms may be written as fc2w/c/(0,(/)*),
                                      with u\a a homogeneous quadratic
polynomial in 0r and (/>*with coefficientsof order unity. These give rise
to a ^-dependent term in the third lineof Eq. (31.7.2),of the form




which is of order k2(k:A2)2A4 = fc4A8.
  The leading ^-dependent term in the fifthline of Eq. (31.7.2)arises
either from k2(/>2terms in /j^, with both ds given by their leading-
order terms, of order z*z, or from terms in one of the ds with two
factors of jc,two factors of 0 and/or (/>*,and two factors of z and/or
z*, with  fAB  and  the other  d given by their leading-order terms, of
order 1 and z*z respectively.Both types of ^-dependent term make a
contribution of order fc2(fcA2)2A4= fc4A8,so higher-order terms may be
neglected.
  The leading term in the sixthlineof Eq. (31.7.2)arisesfrom the leading
term in /J^, which is of order unity, and the leading ^-dependent terms
in d, which are of order (/>*(/>.
                               This makes a contribution to the potential
of order (kA2)4, so here too higher-order terms may be neglected.
            31.7 Gravity-Mediated Super symmetry Breaking             361

  The potential(31.7.2)also contains (^-independent terms of order jc2A6,
k4A8, and so on. The terms of order k2A6 may be cancelled and the terms
of order jc4A8 can be given an arbitrary value # by making a small shift
of the constant term in f(z) away from the value given by Eq. (31.7.8).
  Putting these resultstogether,to order jc4A8 « m4 the potential of the
observable sectorisnow

         M<M')     =                        - 6K2Re   f(<t>)J°m
                       £   >™+*r«a
                            d(f)r


                               \^<j)*r{tA)rs<j>:
                           A
                       +Q(0,0*) + ^,                              (31.7.10)
where Q(0,0*) isa quadratic polynomial in 0 and/or 0* with coefficients
of order jc2A4 « m2, which arises from the ^-dependent terms in g^1
on the third line of Eq. (31.7.2)and from the ^-dependent terms in /J^
and d on the fifthline of Eq. (31.7.2).We have normalized the gauge
superfieldsso that fAB = $ab when allscalarfieldsvanish. (There is also
a <f)dependence arisingfrom a ^-dependent shiftin the equilibrium value
of the hidden sectorscalarsz*,but thisshiftisat most of order (jcA2)4/A3,
and since (31.7.7)is supposed to be stationary at z = z° thisshiftenters
quadraticallyin the effectivepotential of the observable sector fields,and
may thereforebe neglected.)The constant # may be chosen so that the
value of this potentialat itsminimum iszero.
  Finally,letus return to the non-renormalizable terms in the superpo-
tential.As already mentioned, the leading O-dependent terms of thissort
may be expected to be of order kQ>2Z2. When the hidden sector super-
fieldsZ/c are set equal to their equilibrium values z\ these terms become
a second-order polynomial in the Or, with coefficientsof order jcA2.Thus
to leading order, we can take account of these non-renormalizable terms
by simply including a quadratic polynomial function of the Or in the
superpotential,with coefficients  of order jcA2 « mg.
  In thisway theoriesof gravity-mediated supersymmetry breaking avoid
the problem of the /i-term,discussed in Sections 28.1 and 28.5. Recall
that the 517(3) x 517(2) x 17(1)symmetry of the standard model allows
a single superrenormalizable term in the superpotential of the minimal
supersymmetric standard model, a term fiiHjefy). In order to explain
in a natural way why the coefficient/i is not of the order of the Planck
mass, it is necessary to impose some sort of symmetry, like the 'Peccei-
Quinn' symmetry discussed in connection with strong CP violation in
Section 23.6, under which the product {HjeHi) is not neutral. But a
/i-term with \i of the same order mg as other supersymmetry-breaking
362                           31 Supergravity

masses was found phenomenologically necessary in Section 28.5. Such a
term can arisenaturally from the breaking of the Peccei-Quinn symmetry
by the vacuum expectation value of the hidden sector fields,**if the
superpotential contains a non-renormalizable term in which (HjeHi)
appears multiplied with two powers of the hidden sector fieldsz*, with a
coefficientof order k.
  We assume then that the effectivesuperpotential f{(j>)consists of a
homogeneous    polynomial /(3H</>)of third order in the fields0r, with
coefficientsvery roughly of order unity,plus a /i-term that takes the form
of a homogeneous polynomial /(2)(0) of second order in the fields<f>r,
with coefficientsof order mg « kA2. The potential(31.7.10)then becomes



                                                rs

                        -2K2Re[/^)/°']+K4|7°|25:i^|2
                                                         r
                        +Q(M*)     + «.                             (31.7.11)
The terms on the firstline of the right-hand side give a supersymmetric
potential, while the terms on the second and third lines represent a
soft breaking of supersymmetry. With f° « A2/k and (df/dz)° « A2,
the dimensional constants in the soft supersymmetry-breaking terms in
Eq. (31.7.10)are allpowers of kA2 « mg, so that thisiswhere we expect to
find the expectation values of the observable sectorscalar fields,
                                                                 justifying
our choice of thisas the region of fieldspace to explore.
   Setting kA2 equal to a typicalmass « 1 TeV in the effectiveLagrangian
of the supersymmetric standard model, we now find A « 1011 GeV. It
is mildly encouraging that, as discussed in Section 23.6, the spontaneous
breakdown of the Peccei-Quinn symmetry at a scale A « 1011 GeV is
just what is needed to resolve the strong CP problem with a symmetry-
breaking scale in the window from 1010 GeV to 1012 GeV allowed by
astronomical observations.
   Comparing the potential with the scalar fieldterms in the Lagrangian
density (28.4.1)of the minimum supersymmetric standard model, we see
that thisversion of gravity-mediated supersymmetry breaking predictsthat
supersymmetry is broken only by soft scalar mass terms with coefficients

**Thisisknown as theGiudice-Masiero mechanism17.Itisoftendescribed intermsof
  non-renormalizableholomorphicand antiholomorphic termsinthemodifiedKahler
          d but,asdiscussed
  potential                attheend oftheprevious ection,any suchtermscan be
  tradedforholomorphicfactors inthe superpotential.
                                                  Here we have defined
                                                                     d to not
  containholomorphicand antiholomorphic terms,and withthisdefinition
                                                                   the//-term
  can onlyarisefrom non-renormalizable
                                     termsinthesuperpotential.
             31.7 Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking            363

(includingB/i) of order m2. To leading order in fcA,the coefficientsA and
C of trilinearsupersymmetry-breaking terms vanish.
  One serious problem with these resultsis that there is no reason why
the quadratic polynomial Q(0,0*) in Eq. (31.7.11) should respect the
degeneracy among squark masses and among slepton masses discussed
in Section 28.4, that would avoid unobserved flavor-changing processes.
However, the fourth term in Eq. (31.7.11) for the potential makes an
additional contribution k4|/°|2 « k2A4 to scalar squared masses that is
the same for allscalars,so the constraintsimposed by experimental upper
bounds on flavor-changingprocesses might be satisfiedifthe coefficients in
Q((j),   (which arisefrom terms on the thirdand fifthlinesof Eq. (31.7.2))
     (/)*)
happen  to be small compared with fc2A4.
  We would have an interestingrelationamong the parameters of the
minimumsupersymmetric standard model ifitwere reallytrue that ()(</>, </>*)
could be neglected.Taking the quadratic part /(2)of the superpotential as
           the coefficientB\i in Eq. (28.4.1)would be given by the second
li{(j)\e(j)2\
term of Eq. (31.7.11)as B\i = -k2h)°\ so

                           |B| = fc2|/°|=mg,
in agreement with Eq. (31.4.13).Also, allthe squark and slepton masses
Ms would be given by the third term in Eq. (31.7.11)as k2|/°|,and so we
would have the new relation

                               \B\ = Ms.                        (31.7.12)
With allsquark and slepton masses equal, there would be no inconsistency
with limitson flavor-changing processes. Furthermore, with Q neglected
there would be only one complex parameter f° in the supersymmetry-
breaking part of the potential (31.7.11),which can be chosen to be real
by a redefinitionof the over-allphase of the superpotential,so now the
supersymmetry-breaking part of the potential would introduce no new
violationof CP invariance. But there is no known reason why Q should
be small.
  Another serious problem with this version of gravitationally-mediated
supersymmetry breaking isthat itdoes not yieldsufficiently large gaugino
masses.18 According to Eq. (31.6.75),the mass matrix of the 5(7(3) x
517(2) x 17(1)gauginos is given in the tree approximation by

          mAB = exp(K2d/2)J2[g~l]NMLN      (^)       ,          (31.7.13)
                           JVM             \d<PMJ
where here cpu runs over allthe scalarfields(j>r
                                               and z* on which Jab may
depend, with gNM  and Lm  given by Eqs. (31.6.66)and (31.6.69).According
to the estimates we have made here, K2d = 0(jc2A2) < 1; Lk = 0(A2)
while Lr ismuch smaller; and g^1 isof order unity.Also, we assume that
364                        31 Supergravity

jab is a term of order unity plus a term of order k2 times a bilinearin
scalar fieldsand their complex conjugates, so dfAB/dzic is of order k2A.
This gives gaugino masses of order A2 x jc2A.This is much smaller than
the gravitino mass mg « fcA2 (which setsthe scale of the supersymmetry-
breaking terms in the potential (31.7.11)of the observable sector scalar
fields)by a factor of order jcA « 10~7, so if the scalar masses produced
by supersymmetry breaking are of order 1 TeV, then the gaugino masses
will be of order 100 keV, which is far too low to be consistentwith the
fact that gauginos have not yet been observed.
   There are several ways that this problem might be avoided. One is
to include gauge-singlet scalar fieldsamong the z* of the hidden sector,
which can appear linearly in Jab-19 In this case dfAB/dzk will be of
order k rather than fc2A, yielding gaugino masses of order jcA2, which
is comparable to the squark and slepton masses. One trouble with this
approach is that the inclusion of scalarsthat are neutral with respect to
allgauge groups would make itno longer natural for the renormalizable
part of the superpotential to take the form /(0) + /(z).
   Even without gauge singlets,there are one-loop contributions to the
gluino, wino, and bino masses (and to the ^-parameters), calculated in
Section 31.4. For instance, if we take mg at the largest value « 10 TeV
allowed by the 'naturalness'bound discussed in Section 28.1, then with
g2/4n = 0.118, Eq. (31.4.13)would give a gluino mass 3g2mg/l6n2 = 280
GeV, which is certainlyhigh enough to allow the gluino to have escaped
detection. The bino and wino masses depend on the unknown ratio of
the /iparameter and the pseudoscalar Higgs mass m^. Taking this ratio
equal to unity and mg < 10 TeV, Eqs. (31.4.15)and (31.4.16)would give
Wbino = 9g/2mg/167t2 < 73 GeV and mwino = g2mg/167t2 < 27 GeV.19fl
This bound on the wino mass is in conflictwith the fact that wino pairs
have not been seen at LEP in e+-e~ collisionsat an energy sufficiently
high to produce W boson pairs,so that mwino > mw- In order to avoid
this contradiction it would be necessary116 either to take mg > 30 TeV,
which is awkward from the point of view of naturalness,or ii2/m2A> 8.
In any case, thismodel has the general consequence that the gauginos are
much lighterthan the squarks and sleptons.
   If the polynomial Q(0,0*) can be neglected then, as shown in Section
31.4,the ^-parameters are also given by one-loop corrections.These are of
order g2mg/16n2 for squarks and g2mg/16n2 or g'2mg/I6n2 for sleptons.


                          Second Version20

This version of gravity-mediated supersymmetry breaking has an
     sector with chiral superfields Or and a hidden sector with chiral
observable
             31.7 Gravity-Mediated Super symmetry Breaking                365

superfieldsZ&, just as in the firstversion. The differenceis that super-
symmetry is now assumed to be not spontaneously broken in the hidden
sector.Instead, the gauge couplings of the hidden sector,which become
strong at an energy A < mpi, produce a non-perturbative superpotential
for the scalarfieldsof a third sectorof superfields,the modular superfields.
In various theories such as modern superstring theories there are extra
dimensions that are not observed because they have been 'rolledup' into
a tiny compact manifold, with size roughly of the order of k. Typically
some of the parameters that are needed to describe thiscompact manifold
are not fixedin any order of perturbation theory. The values of these
parametersmay vary from point to point in four-dimensional spacetime and
appear  at energies far below the Planck scalek~1 as gauge-invariant scalar
fieldsya, known as modular fields.(The indices a, 6, etc.here of course
have nothing to do with the local Lorentz frame indices used in Section
31.6.)Assuming that supersymmetry isnot broken in the compactification
of the extra dimensions, these fieldsmust be accompanied by fermionic
superpartners and auxiliary fields,which together form gauge-invariant
left-chiralmodular superfieldsYa and their adjoints.*
  Just below the compactification scalewe have a supersymmetric theory
with a superpotential that can depend on allthe superfields,but in which
k isthe only dimensional parameter. The circumstance that the ya are not
fixed in perturbation theory typicallyarisesbecause the compactification
does not resultin any superpotential for the modular superfieldsYa alone.
As we saw in Section 28.1, the 517(3) x 517(2) x 17(1)gauge symmetries
rule out any terms in the superpotential with just one or two factors of
observable sector superfields,except for a possible term bilinearin the
Higgs superfieldsHi and H^. We will again assume that this bilinear
term in the bare superpotential is either accidentally absent (in which
case itdoes not appear in any order of perturbation theory),or is ruled
out by some symmetry, such as the Teccei-Quinn' symmetry discussed in
connection with strong CP violationin Section 23.6.The gauge symmetry
of the hidden sector rules out any terms in the superpotential with just
one factor of the Z^, and we shall assume that either accident or some
symmetry (perhaps the same Peccei-Quinn symmetry) also rulesout terms
with two factorsof the Z&.
  The bare superpotential thereforetakes the form

            Y,Z) = ^2frst(KY)<Dr0>sa>,+ J2fklm(KY)ZkZiZm
    /bare(0>,                                                   + ••• ,
                   rst
                                                                  (31.7.14)

+ Of course,
           modularfields
                       may existevenundertheassumptionsofthefirstversionof
  gravity-mediated
                supersymmetrybreaking,but becauseof thesmallervalueof A in
  thatcasethecouplings
                     ofthemodularfieldsaretooweak tobe ofinterestthere.
366                          31 Supergravity

where frstand fkim are power seriesin their arguments with coefficients
roughly of order unity,and the dots indicateterms involving n > 3 factors
of the Os and Zs, as well as any number of factorsof kYG9 suppressed by
factors proportional to Kn~3.
  We assume that non-perturbative effectsin the hidden sector such as
'gaugino condensation' (the appearance of expectation values of bilinear
functions of gaugino fields)without themselves breaking supersymmetry
produce a superpotential for the modular superfields.Since A is the only
scalein the problem (asidefrom gravitationaleffectssuppressed by factors
of jcA),this superpotential would have to be of the form

                            f(Y) = A3F(KY).                     (31.7.15)
Such terms can also be produced by expectation values of the scalar
components of the Z superfieldsin the Z3 term in Eq. (31.7.14).At the
same time, the replacement of the Z& by the expectation values of their
scalar components in the non-renormalizable terms indicated by dots in
Eq. (31.7.14)will produce additional O-dependent terms in the effective
superpotential,about which more later.The superpotential (31.7.15)is of
the form (31.7.1)originallyassumed in theoriesof gravitationallymediated
supersymmetry breaking, but with e now identifiedas the intermediate
scale A at which the gauge interactions of the hidden sector become
strong.
  It is plausible that the superpotential (31.7.15)can lead to
       breaking by the appearance of ^-terms for the modular chiral
supersymmetry
superfields.For the moment, let'signore the other superfields,leaving the
justificationfor later.The potential for the modular scalarsis given by
Eqs. (31.6.68)and (31.6.69)as

 V(y9ym) = exp(K2d(y,y*))
                             lab
                                                                 (31.7.16)
where d(y,y*) is the Kahler d function with the scalar components of the
Z/c and Or neglected,and
                                         d2d
                                   =
                             U         jr-jr; >                 (3L7.17)



                          La = f+K>f^-.                         (31.7.18)
                               dya      dya
We   are assuming here that V has a stationary point, labelled with a
superscript 0, where L*j=£ 0, so that supersymmetry is broken, but that
    is very small, so that it can be cancelled by terms arising from the
observable sector, leaving us with a flat spacetime. Since / is of the
              31.7 Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking                367

form (31.7.15)and d equals k~2 times a power seriesin Kya and Ky*a
with coefficientsof order unity, the whole potential is of the form fc2A6
times a power seriesin Kya and fey*,again with coefficientsof order unity.
The orders of magnitude of the various ingredients in the potential are
therefore

            y°a= 0(K-X) ,      f° = 0(A3) ,           d° = 0(K~2) ,
                                                                      (31.7.19)
            L2 = 0(fcA3),       g°ab= 0(l).
  With the modular and hidden sector fieldsfixed at their expectation
values,the superpotential of the observable sectoris now of the form
                                                 ••• ,
           /(<D)= $>rsOrOs + £grs,Ora>sa>, +                    (31.7.20)
                   rs            rst
where grstisfrst{Ky$\which isassumed to be roughly of order unity,plus
terms suppressed by powers of jcA.The dots here denote terms with more
than three factorsof O that are suppressed by additional factors of kQ>.
The coefficientfirsarisesfrom the non-renormalizable terms denoted by
dots in Eq. (31.7.14);ifitcomes from a term with n > 1 factorsof Zs as
well as two factorsof Os, then ithas an order of magnitude

                             Hrs = 0{Kn-l\n).                         (31.7.21)
We shallsee that the desired order of magnitude of \i is mg = 0(fc2A3),
which would come from a term with n = 3 factorsof Zs.
  The supersymmetry breaking in the modular sector will be
transmitted
    to the observable sector by effectsof the gravitationalfieldand its
superpartners.Eq. (31.6.68)gives the potential of the observable sectoras

V0 = f*
             ¥^g+«w>ig(j|+«w,!g-

     +2Rej:[g0-I]raf^+'c2(/+/0)|f             0(f),
            7^         \09r

     +                             +
          Ek°~1UL0Lr-3K2|/             /°|
           ab




with the superscript zero again indicating that the modular and hidden
sector scalar fieldsare fixed at their equilibrium values. (This will be
reconsidered later.)Note that, although Eq. (31.7.22)involves terms like
L?a that arise in the modular sector,there are no terms here that refer
explicitlyto the hidden sector.This is because in thisversion of gravity-
mediated supersymmetry breaking, supersymmetry is assumed not to be
368                          31 Supergravity

broken in this sector,so that L£ = 0, and D®A = 0 for any gauge fieldthat
interactswith the hidden sector fields.
  We are interestedin exploring a region of field space in which the
observable sectorfieldsare of order jc2A3,because, as we shall see,thisis
the characteristicmass arisingin the observable sector from gravitational
effectsof supersymmetry breaking in the hidden sector. According to
Eq. (31.6.48)and our estimate f° « A3, thisisalso the order of magnitude
of the gravitino mass mg:

                               mg « k A    .
  In order to calculatethe potential for fieldsof this order, we note that
the Kahler d function for the observable and modular scalarfieldstakes
the form
                     = K~2d{Ky,Ky*) +
        d{<j),<j)\y,y*)               ^0r0*/lrs(Ky,K)/*)
                                       rs
          + Y^ <l>r(l>sBrs(Ky,                        ••• ,
                           *y*) + ^ ^^B^Ky,    Ky*) +             (31.7.23)
             rs                    rs
      A
where d, ArS9 and Brs are power seriesin their arguments with coefficients
of order unity, and the dots indicate terms with n > 2 factors of (j)
and/or (j)*,suppressed by factorsKn~2. According to Eq. (31.6.72),we can
remove any holomorphic term in d along with itscomplex conjugate by
multiplying the total superpotential by a suitable holomorphic factor.In
particular,by multiplying the totalsuperpotential with a factor exp[fc23°+
                 we can arrange that the transformed d function has
KlY,rsB%<j>r<i>s]>
                         S° = 0,          Br°s= 0.                (31.7.24)
We  shall assume that this has been done. Note that, because the total
superpotential contains a constant term f° of order A3, while B% was
of order unity,thistransformation generates a term in the superpotential
that is quadratic in 0r, making a contribution to itscoefficientfirsof order
fc2A3,of the same order as (j)and mg.
  There can be another contribution to thiscoefficientof the same order
of magnitude, arisingfrom terms in the superpotential with n > 1 factors
of 7 s as well as two factors of Os. Eq. (31.7.21)tellsus that, in order
for the contribution to the firscoefficientsfrom this also to be of order
fc2A3, we must have n = 3. We can arrange that this is allowed, while
terms with two factors of Os and n = 2 factors of 7 s are forbidden,
by giving Hi and Hi Peccei-Quinn quantum numbers +1 and the 7 s
quantum numbers —2/3. The breaking of this Peccei-Quinn symmetry by
the vacuum expectation values of the Yk then produces an axion.
  With nrs of order fc2A3, both the bilinear and trilinearterms in the
superpotential of the observable sector are of order fc6A9. The usual
                 31.7 Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking                369

supersymmetric potentialterm ^2r \df/d<j>r\2isthen of order k8A12, so we
have to collectallterms in Eq. (31.7.22)of thisorder or greater.
  With <f>rof order k2A3 and ya fixed at itsequilibrium value y® « k_1,
Eq. (31.7.23)gives

    gr°s= ^°s + 0(K3A3),                                                 (31.7.25)




            +                           + ^6A6),                         (31-7.26)
                 E^>:(^|)0

    £   =                      + °^A6)     = &*     •                    (31-7-27)
            S>
                    (^f)°
where the zero superscriptagain indicates that the ya are fixed at their
equilibrium values y%. We will subject the observable-sector superfields
Or and the modular superfieldsZa to separate linear transformations,
designed so that


                      '*-**•                                             <3i-7-28)
                                          (&)0-*--
With the metric (31.7.25)—(31.7.27)given by the unit matrix plus terms
that are much lessthan unity,itis easy to calculatethe inverse:

        gO-^^         + O^A3),                                           (31.7.29)




                                                + <*«*>,                 (31.7.30,
                   -E*>;(^j

        «?«"' = "£       **             + 0<k6a") = «£•-'' •             (317.31J
                              (|^)°
In particular,our assumption about the form of the functions Ars and Brs
gives the order-of-magnitude estimates




                                                                         (31.7.32)
so that,for <£r= 0(k2A3),

  [g0-']rs= O(l),        [g°-1U       = 0(l),      [g°-1]ra = 0(K3A3).   (31.7.33)
370                             31 Supergravity

Further,
                        .6A9>>
      / = O(^)     = 0(k»A*)
                                     |f
                                            = Oif)     = 0(k4A6)     (31.7.34)
                                     0<Pr
and

                                = 0(<f>)= 0(k2A3) .                  (31.7.35)
                         %-

With /° of order A3, the quantitiesk2(/ + f0)dd/d(j)rin Eq. (31.7.22)are
dominated by k2/V*, which is of order k2 x A3 x k2A3 = k4A6. This is
of the same order of magnitude as df/d(j)r,so in leading order we must
keep both terms:

       &+k2(/+'0)lr*                If+K2f°      * = 0(k4a6) •       (31.7.36)
       v(pr              0(pr       v(pr
In this approximation, and with gjrs replaced by itsdominant term <5rs,
the firstterm in the square brackets in Eq. (31.7.22)is already of the
desired order jc8A12,so we may use these approximations to write


      p8°A,g+*W)f£                                   -+*w>C

                 = E                                                 (31.7.37)
                        IH'°*'2
The second term in the square brackets in Eq. (31.7.22) is of order
fc3A3 x fc4A6 x fcA3 = fc8A12,so we may evaluate it using only leading
terms and find

                                                         0*
                                +
      »»D«-,i.(g                    *2tf+r>£)«

            =                                                  >0*
                                                                     (31.7.38)
                 -a.5>(£=)<
                        ras     x Ja '        0(pr
The third and fourth terms in the square brackets in Eq. (31.7.22)are
individually of order jc2A6, but are assumed nearly to cancel, so non-
leading terms must be included in evaluating their contribution to the
quantity in square brackets. One contribution comes from the terms in
Eq. (31.7.30)for g^-1 that are of second order in (j>and/or <f>*;this
contribution is of order k2(/)2x (kA3)2, which is of order fc8A12.Another
non-cancelling contribution to the potential from the lastterm in square
brackets in Eq. (31.7.22)comes from the interferencebetween / and /°,
which makes a contribution of order jc203A3,which isalso of order fc8A12.
There isalso a constant contribution # from a possible failureof the last
two terms in the square brackets in Eq. (31.7.22)to cancel when (/>r  = 0;
                 31.7 Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking                  371

to avoid a large cosmological constant, we shallhave to assume that # is
also of order jc8A12.(This is an unnatural fine-tuning,which so far has
been necessary in any theory that avoids a huge cosmological constant.)
Putting these estimates together,to order jc8A12the lasttwo terms in the
square brackets in Eq. (31.7.22)are


                                                m:
   ab                                      abrsL       {Bk)
                '                              On
             d'Brs                   '               toto*             0*^ +
    +<t>r<j>s                 + (pr(f)s             L^r-6^Re(/r*)
            dyadyl                    ktyadyi
                                                                         (31.7.39)

All these terms are of the desired order jc8A12,while Eq. (31.7.24)gives
K2d° = 0(k2(/)2)= 0(k6A6), so we can ignore the factor exp(fc2d°)in
Eq. (31.7.22).Finally,the gauge terms on the lastlineof Eq. (31.7.22)are
of order 04 = 0(fc8A12),so these can be evaluated using the leading term
ft in dcfi/dfa.
  Putting thisalltogether,the complete scalar potentialof the observable
sectorto order jc8A12is


 vo^Y.

                                     df_
                                         +k2/V;
                    ras     x *a '   d(j)r


         -E
              abrs **:fe)            +**,te)

               -L.ASA* ( dfys
               +<pr(ps                W-^Rett/0')
                        dyady*b

         +UcY^Uab]°            (E^a^s)           (E^Cb)'"^)         +*•(31.7.40)
                AB             V rs            ) \ tu          )

  The potential (31.7.40)of the observable sector scalar fieldstakes the
form assumed in the minimal supersymmetric standard models discussed
in Section 28.4\ itis the sum of a supersymmetric term KSUSy and a soft
supersymmetry-breaking term 7S0ft

                                 Vo = ^susy+ ^soft•                      (31.7.41)
372                                  31 Supergravity

The supersymmetric term is,as usual,

  ' susy— / J
                  d<t>r             AB          \rs               ) \ tu             /
                                                                                 (31.7.42)
and the soft supersymmetry           breaking term here is
                                   5/ j-o*
      7soft^ 2fc2Re                                   f°\E\<t>r

                                                                  fO*
             -2ReI>(ff)                   LO<Pr


             -E          0r0s     a,,a!.* + <^
                  abrs            dy^y*            dy^y*
                                         On
                                             >0f0*           o*>
                    +0r0S                   L^L£ -6fczRe(//u*) + «\              (31.7.43)
                                 3yfl3yJ
With /($) given by Eq. (31.7.20),thistakes the form

      Ksoft= £    M&rti         + 2Re £   N2 </>r</>s
                                                  + 2Re £ A^Mi                  + % ,
                                                        rsf
                                                                                 (31.7.44)
where

                                    J-ov- {dAsr\° t0,\        ^     / d24
Mr2s= fc4|/°|2<5r,-2fc2Re

                                                                                 (31.7.45)




                     d ^rs \ fOfO*
             -E^™Vl^-                                                            (31.7.46)

and

                         fdAur\°             fdAus\°          (dAut\(           >0*
       Arst = -Yl                                                          gu

                                                                                 (31.7.47)
Our previous order-of-magnitude estimates give

      M2=0(k4A6),                N2=0(k4A6),             Arst = 0(K2Ai).         (31.7.48)
Together with our estimates grst = 0(1) and nrs = 0(/c2A3) for the
constants in Vsusy,thisshows that ifthe potentialhas a stationarypoint at
some 0° ^ 0, then <jPa= 0(k2A3), justifyingour decisionto explore fieldsof
             31.7 Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking               373

thisorder.For an equilibrium value of the (j)r  of thisorder, the equilibrium
value of the various terms in the potential is 0((j)4)= 0(k8A12), so this
is the order of magnitude of the constant # that is needed to cancel the
vacuum energy.
   In order for the characteristicmass fc2A3in the minimal supersymmetric
standard model to be of order 1 TeV we need A « 1013 GeV. If it is a
Peccei-Quinn symmetry that forbids a term in the bare superpotential
with two superfieldfactorseach from the observable and hidden sectors,
as suggested above, then vacuum expectation values of the hidden sector
scalarswillbreak this symmetry, with a symmetry-breaking scale (called
M in Section 23.6) of order 1013 GeV, and an axion mass which is then
given by Eq. (23.6.26)as of order 10~6 eV. This value for the symmetry-
breaking scale is somewhat above the upper bound of 1012 GeV quoted
in Section 23.6,but given the uncertainty of cosmological arguments, this
contradiction isnot decisive.
   Before considering further physical implications of these results,let's
pause to reconsider a short-cutthat we took in deriving them. In
    the potentialfor the observable sectorscalars$r, we fixedthe modular
calculating
fieldsat the equilibrium values y® that they would have in the absence of
the observable sectorfields(j)r.Instead, we ought to set the modular fields
at theirequilibrium values ya{<j>) for the actual values of the 0r, by finding
the stationarypoint of the potential

          Vioiz\{<f>,tf,yS)=V{yS)      + Vo(<l>A\yS),              (31.7.49)
and only then seek an equilibrium value for the (j)r.Since Vq is much
smaller than V for fieldsof interest,the equilibrium value of ya can be
written as
                                  = yl + 6ya(4>,4>*),
                         ya(4>,4>*)                                (31.7.50)
where y® isat the minimum      of V(y,y*) and

            ^    d2V    ,    ,^    d2V ^ ,   dV0                   nn,n
            2^ a a      fyb + >, a . Jyt = —5—   •                 (31.7.51)
             bfyadyb           j^dyadyb      dya

The second derivativesof V are of order k2 x (jcA3)2= jc4A6,while the
firstderivativesof Vo are of order k x jc8A12 = jc9A12,so the Sya are of
order fc5A6. The change in the potential due to this ^-dependent shift
in the equilibrium values of the ya is quadratic in the Sya and <5y*,with
coefficientsgiven by second derivativesof V with respect to ya and/or y*,
and isthereforeof order

                       (fc5A6)2x k2 x (fcA3)2= k14A18 ,
which islessthan the potentialwe have calculated by a factor (fcA)6< 1.
374                         31 Supergravity

  Without further assumptions regarding the functions Ars(y,y*) and
Brs(y,y*\ we can learn nothing whatever from Eqs. (31.7.45)—(31.7.47)
about the precise values of the coefficientsM?S9 N?s9 and Arst in the soft
supersymmetry-breaking potential (31.7.44).The only definiteprediction
that emerges from these resultsis that the coefficientsCy in the soft
supersymmetry-breaking Lagrangian (28.4.1) are all negligible,as has
generally been assumed anyway.
  The greatestproblem presented by the results(31.7.44)-(31.7.48)   isthat
without further assumptions they do not insure the degeneracy of squark
masses and of slepton masses that would avoid the quark and lepton
flavor-changing processes discussed in Section 28.4.The (j)r(j)s-terms
                                                                     in the
soft supersymmetry-breaking potential(31.7.44)and in the superpotential
(31.7.20)are not allowed by 5(7(3) x 5(7(2) x (7(1)to depend on anything
but the Higgs scalars,so they cannot lead to flavor-changing processes.
The problem therefore arisesonly from the fact that the coefficientsM,s
and Arst in Eq. (31.7.44)may not conserve flavorin the same basis as the
Yukawa couplings grst.One way to avoid thisproblem isto assume that for
some reason the functions Ars(y,y*)happen to depend only weakly on the
ya and y*, so that Eq. (31.7.45)gives M}s oc Srs and Eq. (31.7.47)makes
Arst (and hence the Atj coefficientsin Eq. (28.4.1))anomalously small.
Another possibilityis that,although not slowly varying, for some reason
the whole function Ars(y,y*) (or at leastitsfirstand second derivatives
at ya = y^) is proportional to Srs. In this case, Eq. (31.7.45)again gives
M?s oc <5rs,and now Eq. (31.7.47)gives trilinearcouplings Arst oc grsh so
                        in Eq. (28.4.1)would be allequal.21
that the Atj coefficients
  We must also check the gaugino masses produced by this version
of gravitationallymediated supersymmetry breaking. According to Eq.
(31.6.75),the mass matrix of the 5(7(3) x 5(7(2) x (7(1)gauginos is given
in general by


          mAB = exp(fc2d/2)^[g-1]^^        (^)       ,          (31.7.52)

where q>N here runs over allthe fieldson which Jab may depend, with gNM
and Lm given by Eqs. (31.6.66)and (31.6.69).According to the estimates
we have made here, K2d < 1; La = 0(fcA3) for the modular fieldsya and
ismuch smaller for the other fields;and g~£ ~ ba\y.Also, we assume that
jab is a power seriesin Ky with coefficientsof order unity, so dfAB/dya
is of order k. The gaugino masses (31.7.52)are therefore of order jc2A3,
which is the same as the order of magnitude of the scalar masses and
expectation values,and hence islikelyto be large enough to avoid conflict
with observation.The one-loop correctionsconsidered in Section 31.4 are
much smaller here, and do not need to be taken into account.
                   Appendix    The VierbeinFormalism                 375

  In summary, the firstversion of gravity-mediated supersymmetry
    has the advantage of giving an axion mass that iswithin cosmological
breaking
bounds, while the second version has the advantage of giving the gauginos
masses that are comparable to the masses of the squarks and sleptons.
Both versions of gravity-mediated supersymmetry breaking have an
advantageover theories of gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking: they
naturallygive /i-termsof the experimentally necessary order of magnitude.
On the other hand, theoriesof gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking
have the advantage of naturally yielding generation-independent squark
and slepton masses.
  Theories with eitherversion of gravity-mediated supersymmetry
     may naturally entail the existence of slowly decaying superheavy
breaking
particles,which could have interestingastrophysicaleffects.22 It is
plausible
    that the gauge interactionsof the hidden sector that become strong
at energy A can bind composite particleswith masses of order A. These
superheavy particlesmay be long-lived if their decay is forbidden by
accidental symmetries of the renormalizable part of the hidden sector
Lagrangian and only occurs through non-renormalizable terms in the
Lagrangian, which are suppressed by factorsof fcA.



                Appendix      The Vierbein Formalism

The familiar formulation of gravity in terms of a metric tensor g^v is
adequate for theorieswith matter fieldsrestrictedto scalars,vectors,and
tensors,but not for supergravity,where spinors are an indispensable
      Unlike vectors and tensors,spinors have a Lorentz transformation
ingredient.
rule that has no natural generalization to arbitrary coordinate systems.
Instead,to deal with spinors,we have to introduce systems of coordinates
£x(x) w^h a = 0, 1,2, 3 that are locallyinertialat any given point X in
an arbitrarycoordinate system. The Principleof Equivalence tellsus that
gravitationhas no effectin these locallyinertialcoordinates,so the action
may then be expressed in terms of matter fieldslike spinors,vectors,etc.
that are defined in these locally inertialframes, as well as the vierbein,
which arises from the transformation between the locally inertialand
general coordinates

                        w*™                                      (31.A.1)
                                    dx*   x=X
The action will be invariant under general coordinate transformations
x*1 —► xffiand local Lorentz transformations £a —► £/a = Aab(x)£b with
\ac{x)Kbd{x)r]ab= ricd-The definition(31.A.1) of the vierbein shows that,
376                         31 Supergravity

under general coordinate transformations x —► x',ittransforms as
                                            dxv
                                        =
                    e%(x) - e'%(x')         -^e%(x),
                                                                (31.A.2)

while, under a localLorentz transformation £a(x) —► Aa/,(x)^(x), it
transforms
       as

                         e\{x)-+Aab{x)e\{x).                    (31.A.3)
  For instance, theories of pure gravitation may be expressed in terms
of a fieldthat is invariant under local Lorentz transformations and that
transforms as a tensor under general coordinate transformations, the
metric

                            gjiv= *V\       >fc&•               (31.A.4)
Vectors may be regarded eitheras quantities Va that transform as vectors
under local Lorentz transformations

                          Va(x) -► Aab(x)Vb(x)                  (31.A.5)
but as scalarsunder general coordinate transformations, or as quantities
t^ that transform as scalarsunder local Lorentz transformations but as
vectors under general coordinate transformations, the two being related
by
                              va = eay.
But the supergravity action also involves spinor fields,which necessarily
transform like scalars under general coordinate transformations but as
spinors under local Lorentz transformations
                       \pa(x)-► Dap(A(x))xpp(x),                (31.A.6)
where Dap{A) is the spinor representation of the homogeneous Lorentz
group.
  Because the Lorentz transformations in Eqs. (31.A.5) and (31.A.6)
dependon the coordinate x*\ the spacetime derivative of a quantity like
Va(x) or \pa{x)is not just another quantity that transforms in the same
way under local Lorentz transformations and as a covariant vector
undergeneral coordinate transformations. For instance, the derivative of
Eq. (31.A.6)gives the local Lorentz transformation rule

            dptp* -► Dap{A) Id^xpp +                      .
                                   [D-l(A)dfiD(A)]^xpy^
To cancel the second term in the brackets on the right-hand side we
introduce a connection matrix Q^ with the local Lorentz transformation
property
                                        -
                O, - D(A)Q,D-l(A)           (d.DiA^D-HA)        (31.A.7)
                  Appendix     The Vierbein Formalism                 111

and define a covariant derivative

                          ^y   = 3/iV + fyiV >                  (31.A.8)
which transforms under local Lorentz transformations like\p itself:

                          ®^\p-+D(\)g)^.                        (31.A.9)
Also, Q^ must transform likea covariant vector under general coordinate
transformations,so that Q}^ willgive a covariant vector when acting on a
coordinate scalar.In order that Qf^ should give a tensor with one extra
lower index when acting on a tensor, it must be supplemented with the
usual affineconnection term. For instance,when acting on the gravitino
fieldxpp,the covariant derivativeisdefined as
                                    -
        ®/iVv = V>v& + fyiVv = 3/iVv r£vvu + Q/iVv •           (31.A.10)

  Eqs. (31.A.8)-(31.A.10)apply not only for spinors, but for fieldsthat
transform under local Lorentz transformations according to arbitrary
representationsD(A) of the Lorentz group. The matrix Q^ depends on
thisrepresentation,but in any representation itcan be written in the form

                               =
                     PVM*)          ^i\Sab]all<0?(x),          (31.A.11)

where fai, are the matrices representing the generators of the
         Lorentz group in the representation furnished by the fieldsin
homogeneous
question:
      i [fab , fed] = ribefad~ riaefbd+ IbdSca ~ ladfcb ,      (31.A.12)
and coftisa representation-independent fieldknown as the spin connection
that transforms as a covariant vector under general coordinate
          To satisfythe inhomogeneous local Lorentz transformation rule
transformations.
(31.A.7) we can take

                          <=gvV1A;/l,                          (31.A.13)
with the semi-colon again denoting an ordinary covariant derivative,
constructed using the affineconnection T^v. (This is antisymmetric in a
and b because Eq. (31.A.4)givesgvXeavebx = r\ab,
                                               a quantity with vanishing
covariant derivative.)This is not the unique spin-connection for which
Eq. (31.A.7) is satisfied;to it,we can add any fieldthat is a covariant
vector under general coordinate transformations and a tensor under local
Lorentz transformations, a freedom of some importance in supergravity
theories.
  For any choice of spin connection there is a corresponding curvature
tensor.From Eq. (31.A.7) itis straightforward to show that the quantity
     —
3VQ^    3^QV + IPv,^] transforms homogeneously under local Lorentz
378                                     31 Supergravity

transformations
              -                                -
      3vfyi       fyOv + [Qv,Q|i]-► D(A) (5VQ^   + [Ov,fyi])B_1(A) •
                                                 ^Qv
                                                               (31.A.14)
Using Eqs. (31.A.11) and (31.A.12), thismatrix can be expressed as
                          -
                   dva,       d,av + [Q^a,] = \ifabR,vab,                         (31.A.15)
where
                     =            -                       -
              R^ab        dvcof       dpco? + cofcop cb       co£cov ch .         (31.A.16)

From Eq. (31.A.14) it follows that R^                     transforms as a tensor under
local Lorentz transformations

                               R^ab -► D{\)acD{\)bdR^cd            .              (31.A.17)
It also obviously transforms as a tensor under general coordinate
transformations



We can thereforeform a coordinate tensor of fourth rank by writing

                                      R,vab = eaKeb,RfiVK*.                       (31.A.19)
The tensor R^      constructed in this way is the Riemann-Christoffel
curvature tensor corresponding to the particularspin connection co"b.



                                           Problems

                                     for components
  1. Derive formulas (31.2.3)—(31.2.6)                                      of the Einstein
     superfield.

  2. Suppose that supersymmetry is unbroken. Show how to calculate
     the amplitude for emission of a gravitino of very low energy in a
     general scatteringprocess in terms of the amplitude for this process
     without the gravitino.

  3. Check that the supergravity action (31.6.11)is invariant under the
     local supersymmetry transformations (31.6.1)—(31.6.6) to all orders
     in G.

  4. Calculate the change of the generalizedZ)-component (31.6.40)under
     a general local supersymmetry transformation.

  5. Calculate the fermionic part of the Lagrangian density (31.6.49).
                               References                          379

 6. Consider the theory of a singlechiralscalar superfieldO interacting
    with supergravity, with modified Kahler potential d(<&,<&*)= <&*<!>
    and superpotential/($) = M2(<I>+ /?),where M and (Iare constants.
    Find a value of /? for which the classicalfield equations have a
    solutionwith flatspacetime. What isthe value of (j)for thissolution?



                              References

 1. P. Nath and R. Arnowitt, Phys. Lett.56B, 177 (1975); B. Zumino, in
    Proceedings of the Conference on Gauge Theories and Modern Field
    Theories at Northeastern University,1975, R. Arnowitt and R Nath,
    eds. (MIT Press,Cambridge, MA, 1976).This approach isdescribed
    in detailby J.Wess and J. Bagger, Supersymmetry and Supergravity,
    2nd edition (Princeton University Press,Princeton,NJ, 1992).
 2. D. Z. Freedman, P. van Nieuwenhuizen, and S. Ferrara, Phys. Rev.
    D13, 3214 (1976); S. Deser and B. Zumino, Phys. Lett. 62B, 335
    (1976); S. Ferrara, J. Scherk, and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Phys. Rev.
    Lett. 37, 1035 (1976); S. Ferrara, F. Gliozzi,J. Scherk, and P. van
    Nieuwenhuizen, Nucl. Phys. B117, 333 (1976). These articlesare
    reprinted in Supersymmetry, S. Ferrara, ed. (North Holland/World
    Scientific,Amsterdam/Singapore,     1987). Some of these resultshad
    been obtained by D. V. Volkov and V. A. Soroka, JETP Lett.18, 312
    (1973); Theor. Math. Phys. 20, 829 (1974). For a clear description
    of this approach, see P. West, Introduction to Supersymmetry and
    Supergravity,2nd edition (World Scientific,  Singapore, 1990).
 3. S. Ferrara and B. Zumino, Nucl. Phys. B134, 301 (1978).
3a. M. T Grisaru and H. N. Pendleton, Phys. Lett.67B, 323 (1977).
4. K. Stelleand P. C. West, Phys. Lett.74B, 330 (1978); S. Ferrara and
   P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Phys. Lett. 74B, 333 (1978). These articles
   are reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 2.
 5. See, for example, S. Weinberg, Gravitationand Cosmology (Wiley,
    New York, 1972), Sec. 12.5.
 6. See, for example, Gravitationand Cosmology, Ref. 5: Eq. (12.4.3).
 7. See, for example, Gravitationand Cosmology, Ref. 5, Section 10.1.
la. W. Nahm,     Nucl. Phys. B135, 149 (1978).
 8. S. Coleman    and F. de Luccia, Phys. Rev. D21, 3305 (1980).
9. S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. Lett. 48, 1776 (1982).
380                        31 Supergravity

 10. S. Deser and C. Teitelboim, Phys. Rev. Lett. 39, 249 (1977); M.
     Grisaru, Phys. Lett. 73B, 207 (1978); E. Witten, Commun. Math.
     Phys. 80, 381 (1981).
 11. W. Rarita and J. Schwinger, Phys. Rev. 60, 61 (1941).
11a. L. Randall and R. Sundrum, hep-th/9810155, to be published; G.
     F. Giudice, M. Luty, R. Rattazzi, and H. Murayama, JHEP        12,
     027 (1998); A. Pomerol and R. Rattazzi, hep-ph/9903448, to be
     published; E. Katz, Y. Shadmi, and Y. Shirman, hep-ph/9906296, to
     be published.
lib. G. F Giudice, M. Luty, R. Rattazzi, and H. Murayama,    Ref. 11a.
 12. K. Stelleand P. C. West, Ref. 4; S. Ferrara and P. van Nieuwen-
     huizen, Ref. 4; E. Cremmer, B. Julia, J. Scherk, S. Ferrara, L.
     Girardello,and P. van Nieuwenhuizen, Phys. Lett.79B, 231 (1978);
     Nucl. Phys. B147, 105 (1979) (reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 2.);
     D. G. Boulware, S. Deser, and J. H. Kay, Physica 280, 141 (1979);
     E. Cremmer, S. Ferrara, L. Girardello, and A. Van Proeyen, Phys.
     Lett. 116B, 231 (1982); Nucl. Phys. B212, 413 (1983) (reprinted in
     Supersymmetry, Ref. 2). For this construction in two spacetime
     dimensions,see S. Deser and B. Zumino, Phys. Lett. 65B, 369 (1976).
 13. S. Deser and B. Zumino, Phys. Rev. Lett.38,1433 (1977).This article
     is reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 2. Also see D. Z. Freedman and
     A. Das, Nucl. Phys. B120, 221 (1977); P. K. Townsend, Phys. Rev.
     D 15, 2802 (1977).
13a. E. Cremmer, S. Ferrara, C. Kounnas, and D. V. Nanopoulos, Phys.
     Lett. 133B, 61 (1983).For a review of models based on thisidea,see
     A. B. Lahanas and D. V. Nanopoulos, Phys. Rept. 145, 1 (1987).
14. H. P. Nilles, Phys. Lett. 115B, 193 (1982); A. Chamseddine, R.
    Arnowitt, and P. Nath, Phys. Rev. Lett. 49, 970 (1982); R. Barbi-
    eri,S. Ferrara, and C. A. Savoy, Phys. Lett. 119B, 343 (1982); E.
    Cremmer, P. Fayet, and L. Girardello,Phys. Lett. 122B, 41 (1983);
    L. Ibarlez,Phys. Lett. 118B, 73 (1982); H. P. Nilles,M. Srednicki,
    and D. Wyler, Phys. Lett. 120B, 346 (1983); L. Hall, J. Lykken, and
    S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. D27, 2359 (1983); L. Alvarez-Gaume, J.
    Polchinski,and M. B. Wise, Nucl. Phys. B221, 495 (1983).The above
    articlesare reprinted in Supersymmetry, Ref. 2. Also see S. Ferrara,
    D. V. Nanopoulos, and C. A. Savoy, Phys. Lett. 12B, 214 (1983); J.
    M. Leon, M. Quiros, and M. Ramon Medrano, Phys. Lett. 127B, 85
    (1983); Phys. Lett. 129B, 61 (1983); N. Ohta, Prog. Theor. Phys. 70,
    542 (1983); P. Nath, R. Arnowitt, and A. Chamseddine, Phys. Lett.
    121B, 33 (1983); J. Ellis,D. V. Nanopoulos, and K. Tamvakis, Phys.
                             References                            381

     Lett. 121B, 123 (1983). For a review, see H. P. Nilles,Phys. Rept.
     110, 1 (1984).
15. The breakdown of supersymmetry in a supergravity theory with
    an unobserved sector of chiral scalars seems to have been first
    proposed in an unpublished University of Budapest preprint by J.
     Polonyi (1977).
 16. I.Affleck,M. Dine, and N. Seiberg, Nucl. Phys. B256, 557 (1985).
 17. G. F. Giudice and A. Masiero, Phys. Lett. B206, 480 (1988). Also
     see J. A. Casas and C. Munoz, Phys. Lett. B306, 288 (1993); J. E.
     Kim, hep-ph/9901204, to be published.
18. M. Dine and D. A. Maclntire, Phys. Rev. D46, 2594 (1992).
19. T. Banks, D. B. Kaplan, and A. Nelson, Phys. Rev. D49, 779 (1994);
    K. I.Izawa and T. Yanagida, Prog. Theor. Phys. 94, 1105 (1995); A.
    Nelson, Phys. Lett.B369, 277 (1996).
19a. The cosmological implications of a wino that is lighter than the
     bino are discussed by T Moroi and L. Randall, hep-ph/9906527, to
     be published.
20. V. Kaplunovsky and J. Louis, Phys. Lett. B306, 269 (1993); Nucl.
    Phys. B422, 57 (1994).Specificmodels of this sort have been
           by P. Binetruy, M. K. Gaillard, and Y-Y. Wu, Nucl. Phys.
    proposed
    B493, 27 (1997); Phys. Lett. B412, 288 (1997).
21. Theories with extra dimensions in which flavor-changing effectsare
    suppressed have been suggested by L. Randall and R. Sundrum, Ref.
    11a. Problems with such theories were pointed out by Z. Chacko,
    M. A. Luty, I. Maksymyk, and E. Ponton, hep-ph/9905390, to be
    published.
22. K. Hamaguchi, K.-I. Izawa, Y. Nomura, and T. Yanagida, hep-
    ph/9903207, to be published.
                                 32


               Supersymmetry              Algebras
                 in Higher        Dimensions




Ever sincethe ground-breaking work of Kaluza1 and Klein,2 theoristshave
from time to time triedto formulate a more nearly fundamental physical
theory in spacetimes of higher than four dimensions. This approach
was revived in superstring theories,which take their simplest form in
10 spacetime dimensions.3 More recently,it has been suggested that the
various versions of stringtheory may be unifiedin a theory known as M
theory,which in one limitis approximately described by supergravity in
11 spacetime dimensions.4 In this chapter we shall catalog the different
types of supersymmetry algebra possible in higher dimensions, and use
them to classifysupermultiplets of particles.



               32.1   General Supersymmetry     Algebras

Our analysis of the general supersymmetry algebra in higher dimensions
will follow the same logical outline as the work of Haag, Lopuszanski,
and Sohnius5 on supersymmetry algebras in four spacetime dimensions,
described in Section 25.2.The proof of the Coleman-Mandula    theorem in
the appendix of Chapter 24 makes itclearthat the listof possible bosonic
symmetry generators isessentiallythe same in d > 2 spacetime dimensions
as in four spacetime dimensions: in an 5-matrix theory of particles,there
are only the momentum     d-vector P^, a Lorentz generator J^v = — JVfi
(with \xand v here running over the values 1,2,...,d — 1,0), and various
Lorentz scalar 'charges.'(In some theories there are topologicallystable
extended objects such as closed strings,membranes, etc.,in addition
to particles,which make possible other conserved quantities,to which
we will return in Section 32.3.) The anticommutators of the fermionic
symmetry generators with each other are bosonic symmetry generators,
and therefore must be a linear combination of P^, J^v, and various
conserved scalars.This puts severe limitson the Lorentz transformation
properties of the fermionic generators, and on the superalgebra to which
they belong.

                                  382
                  32.1 General Super symmetry Algebras                  383

  We willfirstprove that the general fermionic symmetry generator must
transform according to the fundamental spinor representations of the
Lorentz group, which are reviewed in the appendix to this chapter, and
not in higher spinor representations,such those obtained by adding vector
indices to a spinor. As we saw in Section 25.2, the proof for d = 4 by
Haag, Lopuszanski, and Sohnius made use of the isomorphism of 50(4)
to 517(2) x 517(2), which has no analog in higher dimensions. Here we
willuse an argument of Nahm,6 which is actually somewhat simpler and
applies in any number of dimensions.
  Since the Lorentz transform of any fermionic symmetry generator is
another fermionic symmetry generator,the fermionic symmetry generators
furnish a representation of the homogeneous Lorentz group 0(d — l,d)
(or,strictlyspeaking, of itscovering group Spin(d — 1,1)).Assuming that
there are at most a finitenumber of fermionic symmetry generators,they
must transform according to a finite-dimensionalrepresentation of the
homogeneous Lorentz group. All of these representationscan be obtained
from the finite-dimensionalunitary representations of the corresponding
orthogonal group 0(d) (actuallySpin(d)) by setting xd = ix°. So let us
firstconsider the transformation of the fermionic generators under 0(d).
For d even or odd, we can find d/2 or (d — l)/2 Lorentz generators Jju
hi, J45,", which all commute with each other, and classifyfermionic
generators Q according to the values 0^1,(723,...that they destroy:

 Udi, Q] = -*diQ,        U23, Q] = -°xQ,          [Jas, Q] = -°4sQ
                                                                 (32.1.1)
Since the finite-dimensionalrepresentationsof 0(d) are allunitary,the as
are allreal.
  Let us focus on one of these quantum numbers, a^i = w and referto
any fermionic or bosonic operator 0 as having weight w if

                            [Jdi,0] = -wO,                           (32.1.2)
or, in terms of the Minkowski   component   J01 = iJdu

                            [JouO] = -iwO.                           (32.1.3)
The reason for concentrating on this particularquantum number is that
ithas the specialproperty of being the same for an operator and its
Hermitian
       adjoint.This is because J01 must be represented on Hilbert space
(though not on fieldvariables or symmetry generators) by a Hermitian
operator, so that (remembering that w is real) the Hermitian adjoint of
Eq. (32.1.3)is

                          -[JouO*]    = +iwO\                        (32.1.4)
so 0* has the same weight as O.
384          32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions

  Now consider the anticommutator {Q,Q*} of any fermionic symmetry
generator Q with its Hermitian adjoint. According to the Coleman-
Mandula theorem, it is at most a linear combination of P^, J^, and
scalars.To calculatethe weights of the components of P;<,we recallthe
commutation relation(2.4.13)

                        iWn^Jpol = Ylnp*o Ylno*p>
which shows that Po + Pi has weight w = +1, while the other components
P2, ^3, •••,Pd-i allhave weight zero. In the same way, the commutation
relation (2.4.12) of the J/a, with each other show that Jot + Ju with
i = 2, 3, ...d — 1 have weight w = +1, the Jtj with both i and j between
2 and d — 1 have weight zero, Jio has weight zero, and of course all
scalars have weight zero. We conclude then that all bosonic symmetry
generators have weight +1 or 0 and the anticommutator {Q,Q*} must be
a linearcombination of operators with such weights. If Q has weight w
then {Q, Q*} has weight 2w, and itis manifestly non-zero for any non-zero
Q, so each fermionic generator can only have weight +1/2. (Weight zero
is excluded by the connection between spin and statistics      — fermionic
operators can only be constructed from odd numbers of operators with
half-integerweights.) Going back to the Euclidean formalism, since the
commutators of the particular0(d) generator Joi with allgenerators Q in a
representationof 0(d) are given by Eq. (32.1.2)with w = +1/2, and thereis
nothing specialabout the 01 plane, 0(d) invariance requiresthat the same
istrue for all0(d) generators Jy, so that allthe as in Eq. (32.1.1)are +1/2.
The only irreduciblerepresentations of the homogeneous Lorentz group
with allas equal to +1/2 are the fundamental spinor representations,so
Q must belong to some directsum of these representations.
   We can also use this approach to show that the fermionic generators
Q allcommute with the d-momentum        P^. For this purpose, note that the
double commutator of a momentum        operator Po + ^i of weight +1 with
any  fermionic  generator Q would  have weight either +5/2 ifQ has weight
+1/2 or weight +3/2 if Q has weight +1/2, and since we have found
that there are no fermionic symmetry generators of weight +3/2 or +5/2,
these double commutators must allvanish:

                       [Po±Pu[Po±PuQ]]=0.
It follows then that

               [Po + Pu [Po ± Pu {Q, Q*}]] = -2 {Q±9 Q\),
where

                           Q± = [Po±PuQ\.
Now,    {Q, Q*} is at most a linear combination    of Js, Ps, and scalar
                 32.1 General Super symmetry Algebras                385

symmetry generators.The commutators of Po + Pi with the Ps and scalar
symmetry generators vanish, while the commutators of Po + Pi with the
Js are linearcombinations of Ps, which commute with the other Po ± Pi,
so the double commutator [Po + Pi, [Po + Pi, {Q, Q*}]] must vanish and
therefore {Q+, Q*+) = 0, which implies that Q+ = 0. Since allmembers of
the representationof the Lorentz group provided by the Qs thus commute
with Po and Pi, Lorentz invariance implies that all Qs commute with all
Ps, as was to be shown.
  There is an important corollary that since the Lorentz generators J^v
do not commute with the momentum        operators, they cannot appear on
the right-hand side of the anticommutation relations.For the moment let
us label the Qs as Qn, where n runs over the labelsfor the different(not
necessarilyinequivalent)irreduciblespinor representationsamong the Qs,
now includingtheiradjointsQ*, and also over the index labellingmembers
of these representations.The general anticommutation relationis then of
the form

                       {Qn,Qm}
where the T^m are c-number coefficientsand the Znm are conserved scalar
symmetry generators,which commute with the P^ and J^. We now want
to show that the Znm are centralcharges of the supersymmetry algebra —
that is,that they commute with the Qs and each other as well as with the
P^ and J^v and allother symmetry generators.
  To prove thisfor d > 4, note that for a given Znm to be non-zero, since
itisa scalarallof the as in Eq. (32.1.1)must be opposite for Qn and Qm.
Consider another fermionic symmetry generator Qs, for which the as of
Eq. (32.1.1)are not allthe same as those of either Qn or Qm. (For d > 4
there is always such a Qs in each set of Qs forming an irreduciblespinor
representationof 0(d).)We apply the super-Jacobi identity
    [Qt, {Qm , Qn}] + [Qm , {Qn , Qt}] + [Qn , {Qi , Qm}] = 0 .   (32.1.6)
The anticommutators {Qn9Qs} and {Q/,Qm} are operators that have
some as non-zero, so they can only be linearcombinations of Ps rather
than Zs, and so must commute with allQs. This leavesjust
                   0 = [Qi, {Qm, Qn}] = [Qs, Zmn].                (32.1.7)
Thus in each set of Qs forming an irreduciblespinor representation of
0(d) there is at leastone that commutes with the given Zmn. But Zmn is
a Lorentz scalar,so it must then commute with all Qs. It follows then
immediately from Eq. (32.1.5)that they also commute with each other.
  The fermionic generators must form a representation (perhaps trivial)
of the algebra si consisting of all scalar bosonic symmetry generators.
It follows then by preciselythe same argument used in Section 25.2 that
386         32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions

the central charges Zmn furnish an invariant Abelian subalgebra of si.
The Coleman-Mandula      theorem tellsus that si must be a direct sum
of a compact semi-simple Lie algebra, which by definitioncontains no
invariant Abelian subalgebras, together with 17(1)generators, so the Zmn
must be 17(1)generators,which commute with allother bosonic symmetry
generators,not just with each other.
  To obtain more detailed information about the structure of the anti-
commutation relations (32.1.5),we must be more specific about the
Lorentz transformation and realityproperties of the fermionic
   generators Qn. These are very differentfor spacetimes of even and odd
symmetry
dimensionality.


                          Odd     Dimensionality

The appendix to this chapter shows that for odd spacetime dimensions d
there isjust one fundamental spinor representationof the Lorentz algebra,
by matrices f^ given in terms of Dirac matrices by Eq. (32.A.2),so we
must label the fermionic generators as Qar, where a is a 2(^~1)//2-valued
Dirac index, and r = 1,2, ...,N labelsdifferentspinors in the case of N-
extended supersymmetry. With this notation, the Lorentz transformation
properties of the Qs imply that
                                 = ~
                      [J,v, Qar]     £<//» W QP >               (32.1.8)
                                      P
so that the anticommutators of these generators have the transformation
rule

      > {Qar , QPs}] = ~ YXSv)a*{Q*r
  [i/iv                                  , 6/fc}" Y,(f »v)pp{Qar > Qfs} •
                          a                        t
Recalling the  Lorentz  transformation   rule  (2.4.13)for the momentum
operator P^, we see that the matrix T^s and the operator Zrs in Eq. (32.1.5)
(with Dirac indicesnow suppressed) must satisfythe conditions
                                = -l
        //iv(n)r, + (n)r,/Jv           (TJnflvX + l(T^rsfl/iX
                                                            ,      (32.1.9)

                         /MvZr5 + Zr5/Jv=0.                     (32.1.10)
But Eq. (32.A.38) gives /Jv = -^T1/^,      so Eqs. (32.1.9)and (32.1.10)
may be expressed as the requirement that (r^)^-1      satisfiesthe same
commutation relation (32.A.32) with f^ as y^ while Zrs^~x commutes
with /^v For odd d the matrices satisfyingthese conditions are unique
up to multiplicationwith constants, so we can conclude that
                                   =                              (32.1.H)
                           rips        ign(yxv)*p
                 32 A General Super symmetry Algebras                   387

and

                                    =
                              Z<xrps ^ap Zrs>                       (32.1.12)
with the factoriinsertedin Eq. (32.1.11)for laterconvenience. With Dirac
indices suppressed, the anticommutation relations(32.1.5)now read

                     {Qr, Qj} = ignyXVPx            + ZnV •         (32.1.13)
   Both TAarpsand Zarps are symmetric under interchange of a and r with
p and 5, while Eqs. (32.A.30) and (32.A.31) (with d = In + 1) show that:
yXc€ is symmetric and # is symmetric for d = 1 (mod 8);yX(€ is symmetric
and # is antisymmetric for d = 3 (mod 8); yX(& is antisymmetric and #
is antisymmetric for d = 5 (mod 8); and yX(€ is antisymmetric and # is
symmetric for d = 7 (mod 8). It follows that: grs is symmetric and zrs is
symmetric for d = 1 (mod 8); grs is symmetric and zrs is antisymmetric
for d = 3 (mod 8);grs is antisymmetric and zrs is antisymmetric for d = 1
(mod 8); and grs is antisymmetric and zrsis symmetric for d = 1 (mod 8).
  The complex conjugate of the matrices f^ is given by Eq. (32.A.37).
By taking the Hermitian adjoint of Eq. (32.1.8),we see that ^2p(^P)afiQpr
has the same Lorentz transformation properties as any Qas, and therefore
must be a linearcombination of them
                                       =           ^rsQas •         (32.1.14)
                      £0*/Otf    Gjr       £
                       P                       s

Taking the Hermitian adjoint of this equation and using Eqs. (32.A.28)
and (32.A.29) with d = In + 1 yields

         &*&   = (-If • 1 ,       a = (d- \){d- 3)/8 .              (32.1.15)
For d = 1 (mod 8) and d = 3 (mod 8) the spinor representation of the
Lorentz algebra is real, and we can choose a basis for the fermionic
generators such that Sf = 1. In contrast, for d = 5 (mod 8) and d = 1
(mod 8) the spinor representation of the Lorentz algebra is pseudoreal,
and it is evidently impossible to choose a basis with Sf oc 1. By taking
the determinant of Eq. (32.1.15),we see that in thiscase Det(—1) > 0, so
for d = 5 (mod 8) and d = l (mod 8) there must be an even number N of
fermionic generators.In thiscase we can choose a basis in which Sf = Q,
where Q isthe real antisymmetric block-diagonal matrix



                                                                    <*•"«>
                                               «-(-°.         j)-
      °-(H           ;•••)•
  We can deduce the realityand positivityproperties of grs and zrs by
388           32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions

using Eq. (32.1.14)to rewrite the anticommutation relation(32.1.13)as

           {Qr, Q]} = i(gPT)rsy&W)T-lPX       + (z^T)rs«(«/0T~! .

Eqs. (32.A.12),(32.A.16),and (32.A.30)with d = 2n+l show that 0T = -0
and W7"1    = (-l)W-W+i)/8. lf so

      {2r, Ql) = -(-l)W-»W+»/8   [i(g^TW^PA
                                                 + (z^T
                                                          )„/*)]
                                                                .   (32.1.17)

Recalling that yo = */?,we note that the operator matrix —iyipP* is
positive,and positive-definiteaside from the vacuum state. By
      a state
considering   of            large momentum
                 sufficiently                  so that the central charge
term in Eq. (32.1.17)may be neglected, we conclude that the matrix
(—i)W-W+i)/8g5?T js positiveand Hermitian. Then considering arbitrary
momenta, we also find that the array of operators (z£fT)rsis Hermitian.
(For non-zero central charges there is a lower bound on the mass,
     to Eq. (25.5.22),which willnot be given here.)From the Hermiticity
analogous
of g£fT we have

                      gt = yrt-igyr   = (_!)^g^T                    (32.1.18)
We are now in a position by an appropriate choice of basis to put the
anticommutation relationsin a convenient canonical form.
  For d = 1 (mod 8) we have g and z symmetric and (— \)a = +1, so if
we choose a basis in which Sf = 1 then g isrealand the individual zrs are
Hermitian operators. We may introduce new Qs without changing Sf = 1
by multiplying the old Qs by any real matrix si, with the resultthat g is
changed to sigsi1. Since g is a positive matrix for d = 1 (mod 8),by a
well-known theorem6" we may choose si to make g = 1.
  For d = 3 (mod 8) we have g symmetric, z antisymmetric, and (—l)a =
+1, so if we choose a basis in which S? = 1 then g is real and the
individual zrs are anti-Hermitian operators. As in the case of d = 1 (mod
8),we may further adapt the basis so that g = 1.
  For d = 5 (mod 8) we have g antisymmetric, so, with the choice Sf = Q,
Eq. (32.1.18)reads g* = —QgQ, where Q is the standard antisymmetric
matrix (32.1.16).Here we may introduce new Qs while keeping Sf = Q
by multiplying the old ones by any matrix $ with ^* = —Q^Q, with the
effectthat g is changed to ^g^T. Since (— \)a = — 1, gQ is positive,and
so in thisway we may arrange that g = —Q. Also, z is antisymmetric and
zQ is Hermitian, so z* = —QzQ.
  For d = l (mod 8) we again have g antisymmetric, but now (— 1)" = +1,
so by the same method as for d = 5 (mod 8), we may choose a basis in
which g = +£X Also, z is now symmetric and zQ is again Hermitian, so
now z* = +QzQ.
                    32.1 General Supersymmetry Algebras                389

                             Even Dimensionality

The appendix to this chapter shows that for even spacetime dimensions
d there are two inequivalent fundamental spinor representations of the
Lorentz algebra by matrices f^v given in terms of Dirac matrices by
Eqs. (32.A.22),(32.A.2),and (32.A.17).Therefore here we must label the
fermionic generators as Q*, where a isa 2^2-valued Dirac index, r labels
differentQs belonging to equivalent representationsof the Lorentz algebra
in the case of extended supersymmetry, and
                                            = ±e£,                 (32.1.19)
                          E(W+iWG?r
                           p
where y^+i = id^2~ly\••-jd-iyo-With this notation, the Lorentz
transformation
       properties of the Qs imply that
                                    -
                       Vm,    Gil =   Y,(f%)«P       Qjr.          (32.1.20)
                                       p
where /±v are the matrices (32.A.22).Taking account of Eq. (32.1.19)and
the relation^_1y^+i^ = (— l)^2W+i> the same arguments that gave the
anticommutation relations(32.1.13)for odd d now give

              {Q±, tf-W)          = ig±                 SVPx   ,   (32.1.21)
                                           (^1)

              {e±, &-*n        T} = 4                              (32.1-22)
                                          (^f^)«•

  Eqs. (32.A.30) and (32.A.31) show that ^yx is symmetric for d = 0 (mod
8) and d = 2 (mod 8) and antisymmetric for d = 4 (mod 8) and d = 6
(mod 8),while # is symmetric for d = 0 (mod 8) and d = 6 (mod 8) and
antisymmetric for d = 2 (mod 8) and d = 4 (mod 8). Hence Eq. (32.1.21)
requires the symmetry properties
                                      <*= °>2(mod8)
          ,±
           rs = J^M)'/2
          '"
          £H    ^ ***,
                     "'-,v/-
                        ,wr
                \-gfr{-l)"r-          <f= 4,6(mod8)
while Eq. (32.1.22)requires that

                                      d = 0,6 (mod 8)
           -rs- \                                                  (32124)
                     _z±(-n<//2       d = 2,4 (mod 8)

In particular,z± issymmetric for d = 0 (mod 8),g1^ issymmetric for d = 2
(mod 8),z± is antisymmetric for d = 4 (mod 8), and g± is antisymmetric
for d = 6 (mod 8).
  Taking the Hermitian adjoint of Eq. (32.1.20)and using Eq. (32.A.25)
shows that ^flQf* has the same Lorentz transformation properties as the
390          32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions

                J) and isthereforea linearcombination of them:
operators Q+(

                          WQ?      =                                      (32.1.25)
                                       J2^sQf{-1)d/2.
                                        S
Taking the Hermitian adjoint of this equation and using Eqs. (32.A.28)
and (32.A.29) with d = In gives
        ^±*^T(-)d/2 = (-1)a . t ^      a = d(d- 2)/8 .        (32.1.26)
For d = 0 (mod 8) and d = 4 (mod 8) Eq. (32.1.25)relatesone irreducible
representation to another, and we may choose bases in which ^        = 1
for d = 0 (mod 8) and S?± = +1 for d = 4 (mod 8). For d = 2 (mod 8)
Eq. (32.1.25)relatesreal representationsto themselves, and we may choose
bases with S^± = 1. For d = 6 (mod 8) Eq. (32.1.25)relatespseudoreal
representationsto themselves; the determinant of Eq. (32.1.26)shows that
there must be an even number of Q+ and an even number (not necessarily
the same!) of Q~9 and we may choose bases with Sf^ = Or1, where Or1
are standard real antisymmetric matrices of the form (32.1.16).
  We can deduce the realityand positivityproperties of g± and the reality
properties of z± by using Eq. (32.1.25)to rewrite the anticommutation
relations(32.1.21)and (32.1.22)in the form

      {fir1> fif} =                ytf P^W?-1           {^T1)rs
                                                                      >   (32.1.27)
                      (^T^)


         {fir1,fif'} =                     W)T_1     (^TT)rs
                                                                  •       (32.1.28)
                          (^f^)
We again use the relationsWT_1      = (-1)^+2)/8, f = -0, and y0 = ijff,
and conclude that (—i)<W+2)/8g±y±T is Hermitian and positive,while
(z+y-7)1" = z~y+T.       For d = 0 (mod 8) we can adopt a basis with
Sf± =  1, g± =   1, and z+t = z~; for d = 2 (mod 8) we can adopt a basis
with ^    =  1, gi = —1, and z+1"= z~; for d = 4 (mod 8) we can adopt
a basis with S?*- = +1, g1 = +1, and z+t = —z~; and for d = 6 (mod 8)
we can adopt a basis with y1 = Q1, g1 = Q1, and (z+Q-)1" = z~Q+.
  To summarize, in appropriate bases the anticommutation relationsand
realityand symmetry conditions are as follows:66
d = 0 (mod 8)

                  {fi±, QD        = iSrs                 Vx«Pi    ,       (32.1.29)
                                            {^±i)


                       {fi±,e±T}       =                                  (32.1.30)
                                           4(i±p^,

                  n      <£* = Qf ,           4    = z± = (z+)* .         (32.1.31)
                   32.1 General Supersymmetry Algebras                         391

d = 1 (mod 8)

                      {Qr, Ql) = i6„yx«Px           + zn« ,                (32.1.32)

                     WO?      = Qr ,          Zrs= Zsr= Ks ■               (32.1.33)

d = 2 (mod 8)

           {Qt, QfT} = -iSrs                        ^Px        ,           (32.1-34)
                                     (i^±1)


                      {^^T}          =                                     (32-1.35)
                                         ^(^)».

                n     Q?   = Qr ,         4    = -z±' = -z% .              (32.1.36)

d = 3 (mod 8)

                      {0r ,Qj} = iSrsJX^PX+           Zrs^ ,               (32.1.37)

                    KM;    = Qr,          zrs= -zsr = -z*rs.               (32.1.38)

d = 4 (mod 8)

           {QhQD           = +i*rS                  yX<*Px ,               (32.1.39)
                                     (^T1-)


                      {g±,e±T}       =                                     (32.1.40)
                                         z±(i^±i)^,

           n    Qr' = ±Qf       ,        z± = zfs*= -z± .                  (32.1.41)

d = 5 (mod 8)

                     {Qr, Ql} = -ias/           <€Px + zr;f€,              (32.1.42)


     VPQr=J2nrsQS,                  Zrs=-Zsr,         z' =-QzQ         .   (32.1.43)
              S

d = 6 (mod 8)

                 {fi±, &±T} = «£                          /^       •       (32-1-44)
                                          (^f^)


                      {Q±,Qf^        =                                     (32.1.45)
                                         z±(^±i^,
392           32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions

       n   q?    =           "£e*     >          4* = ^4"T        = 4    ■      (32.1.46)
                     E
                         s

d = l (mod 8)

                             {Qr , Qj} = itorsJ*VPX + Zr& ,                     (32.1.47)

      VpQ^YtGrsQs,                         zrs= zsr,        z* = +Qz£l.         (32.1.48)
               s
  Inspection of these anticommutation relationsreveals that in the
absence
      of central charges they are invariant under groups of linear
           on the fermionic generators, of the form Qr —* J2S KsQs for d
transformations
odd and Q^ —* X)s VftQf f°r ^ even. In order to preserve the relations
(32.1.29)-(32.1.48)itis necessary that the Vs should satisfythe conditions:
d = 0 and d = 4 (mod 8)
                             F±F+T     = 1,          V±* = V+ .                 (32.1.49)

d = 1 and d = 3 (mod 8)
                                VVT       = 1,       V* = V .                   (32.1.50)

d = 2 (mod 8)
                             V±V±T    = l,            V± = F±* .                (32.1.51)

d = 5 (mod 8)
                             VilVT = Q,             V* = -QFQ.                  (32.1.52)

d = 6 (mod 8)
                     K±F±T          = 1,         V±* = -Q±V±Q±                  (32.1.53)

d = 1 (mod 8)
                             V£IVT = Q,             V* = -QVCl.                 (32.1.54)
These matrices form the groups:
d = 0 and d = 4 (mod 8)                              U(N)    .

d = 1 and d = 3 (mod 8)                             O(N)     .

d = 2(mod8)                           0(N+)xO(N_)            .

d = 5 and d = 7 (mod 8)                     USp (N)         N even .

d = 6 (mod 8)                         USp(N+)       x USp(N-)           N+ even .
                        32.2 Massless Multiplets                     393

Here N is the number of fundamental spinor representationsamong the
Qs for d odd and the number of fundamental spinor representations of
each chiralityamong the Qs for d = 0 (mod 8) and d = 4 (mod 8). For
d = 2 (mod 8) and d = 6 (mod 8) the numbers of fundamental spinor
representationsamong the Qs need not be the same for each chirality,
                                                                   and
so these are denoted N+ and A/_.




                      32.2   Massless Multiplets

We will now consider how the supersymmetry algebras constructed in
the previous section may be used to construct supermultiplets of massless
particlestatesin d > 4 spacetime dimensions. The momentum         operator
P*1 commutes with all fermionic symmetry generators, so we can work
in the one-particlesubspace of Hilbert space where P*1 has a definite
lightlikeeigenvector p^9 which may be taken in a directionwith pl = p°
and all other spatial components of p^ zero. Just as in the case of
four spacetime dimensions, discussed in Section 2.5, these one-particle
states are classifiedaccording to the finite-dimensionalrepresentations
                         group, the subgroup of the homogeneous Lorentz
they provide of the little
group  that leaves p^ invariant.The  littlegroup contains combined boosts
along directions perpendicular to p and rotations in planes in which p
lies,such as the transformations (2.5.6)for four spacetime dimensions,
but these form an invariant Abelian subgroup and therefore in a finite-
dimensional representationmust be represented by the unit operator. With
thissubgroup omitted, the reduced little  group in d dimensions is 0(d — 2\
consisting of rotations in planes orthogonal to p. We therefore classify
massless particlestates according to the representationsthey provide of
0(d — 2) and of the automorphism groups described at the end of the
previous section.
  These representationsare more complicated than those we have dealt
with in four spacetime dimensions, where the reduced little  group is 0(2)
and the representations are one-dimensional, characterized by a single
number, the helicity.Nevertheless it is useful to label the
      of the reduced littlegroup 0(d — 2) with a 'spin,'defined as the
representations
maximum absolute value of the eigenvalue of any generator J,y in the
representation.
  It is widely believed that there are no consistentquantum fieldtheories
involving massless particleswith spin greater than 2. It is known7 that
soft massless particleswith spin j > 1/2 can only interactwith conserved
currents carrying spin j. For j = 1 these are the currents of ordinary
conserved scalars,like electriccharge; for j = 3/2 they are the one or
394         32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions

more supercurrents associated with supersymmetry; for j = 2 there is a
singlecurrent, the energy-momentum      tensor; but for j > 5/2 there is no
conserved current with which a soft massless particlecould interact.We
may derive stringent limitson the dimensions in which supersymmetry
is possible by adopting a prohibition against there being more than one
type of massless particleof spin 2, or any massless particleswhatever of
spin greater than 2.
   Let us return for a moment to the classification   of operators used in
Section 32.1,according to a weight equal to the value of the 0(d) generator
Jd\ that they destroy. (Recall that Joi = iJdi-)The fermionic
       generators have weights 1/2 and —1/2, so the anticommutator of
supersymmetry
any of these generators with itsHermitian adjoint can only have weight
+1 or —1, respectively,and thereforemust be respectivelyproportional to
the operator P° + P1 or P° — P1. But we are working in a subspace of
Hilbert space in which the operator P° — P1 vanishes, so in this subspace
the fermionic supersymmetry generators of weight —1/2 all vanish. To
classifythe one-particlestateswe thereforehave availablejust half of the
supersymmetry generators,the 2n_1 generators with weight a<i\= +1/2.
   We can furtherdivide the remaining supersymmetry generators into two
classes,those in which $21 = 1/2 or a^ = —1/2 as well as Gd\ = +1/2.
Since the operator P° + P1 has 0-23= 0, the fermionic supersymmetry
        of each classanticommute with each other, though not necessarily
generators
with their adjoints or with generators of the other class.
   Now consider a representationof the littlegroup 0(d—2) with spin j, and
consider any state \X) that is an eigenstate of J23 with eigenvalue X > 0
and is annihilated by all supersymmetry generators with 0-23= —1/2.
(Any state that has the maximum       eigenvalue j for J23 is of this type,
but  in general there may   be  other  such states.) We may form states
with J23 =    —
            X k/2 by acting on \X) with k fermionic generators having
(723= +1/2 as well as Gd\ = +1/2. (It can be shown that none of these
states vanishes, because acting on them with the adjoints of k of these
fermionic generators gives back the state \X).) If there is a total of Jf
fermionic supersymmetry generators of all types, then there are Jf 14 of
them with 0-23= +1/2 and Gd\ = +1/2, and since these operators all
anticommute the number of statesformed in this way with J23 = X — k/2
willbe given by the binomial coefficient

                                          •                       <",,,
                               (r)
which when summed from k = 0 to the maximum        value k = Jf 14 gives
a totalof 2^/4 components. The minimum eigenvalue of J23 obtained in
this way is X — */T/8, reached by multiplying the state \X) by k = Jf 14
supersymmetry generators. Taking X = j9 we see that to avoid having
                        32.2 Massless Multiplets                    395

eigenvalues of J23 greater than +2 or lessthan —2, we must have j < 2
and j — Jf'/8 > —2, which requiresa totalnumber of fermionic generators
Jf no greater than 32.
  Further, for */T = 32 supersymmetry generators there can be at most
a singlesupermultiplet of massless particlesformed in this way by acting
on the state |2)with products of supersymmetry generators having 0-23=
+1/2 and g<i\= +1/2. These stateshave eigenvalues for any generator
            group running in steps of 1/2 from —2 to +2. It is only for
of the little
Jf < 32 that there can be 'matter' supermultiplets,supermultiplets that
do not contain the graviton.
  A singlefundamental spinor representation in 2n or 2n + 1 dimensions
has 2n components, so in order to have no more than 32 fermionic
generators we must have n < 5. The spacetime dimensionality can thus
be no larger than d = 11 and in thiscase must have N = 1. Supergravity
in 11 dimensions is of specialinterest,because it may be the 'low-energy'
limitof a fundamental theory known as M theory* which isalso believed
to yield various stringtheoriesin other limits.We willnow work out the
spin content of N = 1 supersymmetry in d = 11 dimensions in detail,as
an example of how thiscan be done by enlightened counting.
  We can construct allthe statesof the massless multiplet for d = 11 by
acting on an eigenstate |2) of J23 having eigenvalue 2 with products of
k = 0,1,...,8 supersymmetry generators having 0-23= +1/2 and am-x in =
+1/2. According to Eq. (32.2.1), we obtain one stateeach with J23 = +2,
eight stateseach with J23 = +3/2, twenty-eight stateseach with J23 = +1,
fifty-sixstateseach with J23 = +1/2, and seventy stateswith J23 = 0.
   For d = 11 the spin 2 graviton representation of the littlegroup 0(9)
is a symmetric tracelesstensor with 9 x 10/2 — 1 = 44 independent
components: there is one 2 + i3, 2 + i3 component with J23 = +2; seven
2 + i3, k components with J23 = +1; and twenty-eight fc,/ components
with J23 = 0. (Here k and / run over the seven values 4, 5, ...,10. We do
not count the 2 + i3, 2 — B component because it is related to the k, /
components by the tracelessnesscondition in this representation.)
  There isalso a singlespin 3/2 gravitino representation.This consistsof
a spinor xptwith an extra nine-vector index f,subject to an irreducibility
condition Y^iltWi — 0 which excludes spin 1/2 components, and so has
9x16—16=       128 independent components.
  By subtracting the number of components with each value of J23
contained in the graviton and gravitino statesfrom those formed acting
on 12) with supersymmetry generators, we see that we need one or more
additionalstateshaving a totalof 28 — 7 = 21 components with J23 = +1
and 70 — 28 = 42 components with J23 = 0. The only representations of
orthogonal groups that have no eigenvalues of J,7sother than +1 and 0
396        32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions

are the antisymmetric tensors.An antisymmetric tensor Tiv..ip
                                                            of rank p
in nine dimensions has

           (
               ) components          with J23 = 0 ,
                               7*,.../^

                                                        = ±1,
           ( p_ 1 )
                      components   T2±Bkr~kp with J23

                      comPonents                with J23 = 0 ,
          ( p_ 2 )                 T2+,-32-*3*3-*p

where k\9...9kprun over the seven values 4,5, ...,10. For 0(9) the only
independent antisymmetric tensors are of rank p = 0, 1,2, 3, and 4. The
antisymmetric tensor of rank 4 has 35 components with J23 = ±1, which
is more than needed, so itmust be excluded. Any combination of p = 0,
p = 1, and p = 2 tensors with the twenty-one needed components with
J23 = +1 would have too many components with J23 = 0 (147 for 21 one-
forms and no two-forms; 120 for 14 one-forms and 1 two-forms; 53 for 7
one-forms and 2 two-forms; and 66 for no one-forms and 3 two-forms),
so we must include at leastone three-form.The antisymmetric tensor with
rank p = 3 has just 21 components with J23 = +1 and 42 components
with J23 = 0, which isjust what is needed. We conclude that the unique
massless particlemultipletfor N = 1 supersymmetry in d = 11 contains a
graviton,a gravitino,and a particlewhose statestransform under the little
group as a singleantisymmetric tensor of rank 3.
                                            for d = 10. Here there are two
   There is a richer variety of possibilities
ways  to have  Jf =  32 generators:  the fermionic generators can comprise
two 16-component Weyl spinors of the same chirality,     with an
automorphism
       group   0(2), or two  of  opposite chirality,with no automorphism
group. For d = 10 it is also possible to have a single Weyl fermionic
generator, with just Jf = 16 independent components. These three
         play an important role in modern superstring theories — they
possibilities
represent the massless particlespectrum of three kinds of superstring:
type IIA for 16 generators of each chirality;type IIB for 32 generators of
the same chirality;and the heteroticsuperstring for 16 generators of just
one chirality.
   The type IIA case of d = 10 and opposite chiralityis just like the
case of d = 11, except that the irreducible representations of the little
group 0(9) for d = 11 break up into separate irreduciblerepresentations
of the littlegroup 0(8) for d = 10. Thus the 0(9) graviton multiplet is
decomposed into an 0(8) graviton with 8 x 9/2 — 1 = 35 components, an
0(8) vector with 8 components, and a scalarwith 1 component; the 0(9)
gravitino multiplet is decomposed into 0(8) gravitinos of each chirality
with (16 x 8 — 16)/2 = 56 components each and 0(8) spinors of each
                             323 p-Branes                            397

chiralitywith 8 components each; and the 0(9) three-form is decomposed
into a 0(8) three-form with 56 components and an 0(8) two-form with
28 components.
   In the type IIB case of d = 10 with N+ = 2 and JV_ = 0 we must
classifystatesaccording to the representation of the little
                                                          group 0(8) and
a quantum number q that labelsthe representationsof the automorphism
group 0(2), under which the supersymmetry generators transform as a
2-vector. Since there is only one graviton, it must have q = 0. Acting
on these stateswith a supersymmetry generator gives two gravitinos with
q = +1 and 56 components each; acting with another supersymmetry
generator gives 2 two-form tensors with q = +2 and 28 components each;
acting with another supersymmetry generator gives 2 Weyl spinors with
q = +3 and 8 components each; and acting with another supersymmetry
generator gives 2 scalarswith q = +4 together with a self-dualfour-form
with q = 0 and 35 components.
   In the heteroticcase of d = 10 with a single Weyl fermionic
    there are just Jf = 16 independent components. In this case there
generator
is a graviton supermultiplet consisting of a graviton transforming under
0(8) as a symmetric tracelesstensor with 35 independent components;
a gravitino with 56 independent components; an 0(8) two-form with 28
independent components; a Weyl spinor with 8 components; and a scalar.
(This graviton supermultiplet isconstructed by acting with supersymmetry
generators on one state |2),six states |1),and one state |0),giving
       8 x 24 = 128 = 35 + 56 + 28 + 8 +1 components.) Here we also have
altogether
the possibilityof gauge supermultiplets that contain no particleshaving
values greater than 1 or lessthan —1 for the eigenvalue of any Jy. These
gauge supermultiplets are formed by acting with supersymmetry
     on a tate |1),and contain one gauge particlebelonging to the vector
generators
representationof 0(8), with 8 components, and one particletransforming
as a fundamental Weyl spinor of 0(8), also with 8 components.


                            32.3   p-Branes

In some theoriesin addition to particlesthere are stableextended objects,
eitherof infinite xtent or stabilizedby 'wrapping' around a topologically
non-trivialspacetime. The study of supersymmetry and supergravity in
higher-dimensional theoriesof thissort has opened up remarkable
opportunities
         for the construction of string theories and supersymmetric field
theoriesin lower-dimensional spacetime and for the proof of equivalencies
among these theories,48which are beyond the scope of thisbook. The
feature
     of these extended objects that concerns us here isthat they can carry
conserved bosonic quantitiesother than those allowed by the Coleman-
398        32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions

Mandula   theorem. These new conserved quantitiesmay appear on the
right-hand side of the anticommutation relationsof supersymmetry, along
with the momentum     operator and ordinary conserved quantities.9
  In the cases that have been studied so far, the new conserved bosonic
quantitiesare allforms - antisymmetric tensors. For instance, an object
of spatial dimensionality p (known as a 'p-brane') in a spacetime of
dimensionality d is described by specifying the d spacetime coordinates
x^(<7,t)(generallyin overlapping patches covering the object)as functions
of the time t and of a set of p coordinates ar that parameterize positions
on thisobject.Ifthe manifold x^ = x^{a,t) at a given time is topologically
non-trivial,in the sense that it cannot be continuously deformed to a
singlepoint, then itmay have a non-vanishing value for the topologically
invariant integral*
                        r                   p    p         p
           jum-np =    /da\dai...d(jP                 ••
                      J                    ^ y^•       YleYXri'"rp
                                           r,=lr2=l    rp=l
                           ax"(M)fo*(M)..>*(M)                 '             ''
                                                                          r3231)
                             dar*     dar*            darp
The invariance of such integrals under small changes in the functions
x^(a,t) shows in particularthat they are invariant under spacetime
         and hence may appear along with P*1 and central charges on
translations,
the right-hand side of the anticommutation relationsfor the
       generators.10 The calculation of the coefficientsof such tensors
supersymmetry
on the right-hand side of the anticommutation relationsis analogous to
the Olive-Witten calculation of the scalar central charge Zrs in N = 2
supersymmetry theoriesin four spacetime dimensions, discussed in Section
27.9.We willmake no attempt in thissectionto evaluate these coefficients
or to survey the other non-topological p-forms that may appear in the
anticommutation relations,11but will simply consider the effectson the
supersymmetry algebra of including conserved antisymmetric tensors that
commute with the momentum      operators.

*To seethatthis     istopologically                      ofan infinitesimal
                                         notethattheeffect
              integral          invariant,
 changeSx^ia^)inthefunctionx/i((T,t)
                                 isto changeI^^-^p by theamount

                                                               €n r2-rp


                          dx^ dx^ •••dx"-' c u dx"*-*•••dx»p
                      x                   Sx^n
                          d(jri
                              dar2 d<7r"-i d(jr"+i d<rrp
                             istakenovera compact manifold.Italsovanishes
 whichvanisheswhen theintegral
                                                     to vanishrapidlywhen
             isoverall<r,provided6x^(0,t)isconstrained
 iftheintegral
 ar —► 00.
                                 323 p-Branes                        399

  It is important that this possibilitydoes not affectthe key resultthat
the supersymmetry generators always belong to the fundamental spinor
representationsof the Lorentz group. This is because a totally
        tensor in Euclidean coordinates can have at most one spacetime
antisymmetric
index equal to 1 and at most one spacetime index equal to d, and therefore
its'weight'defined by Eq. (32.1.2)can only be +1 or 0. Just as before, this
means that the weight of a supersymmetry generator can only be +1/2;
Lorentz invariance then implies that all the as defined by Eq. (32.1.1)
are +1/2, which is only possible ifthe supersymmetry generators belong
to a fundamental spinor representation of 0(d — 1,1).Also, because the
new terms in the anticommutators of supersymmetry generators commute
with momentum, the same argument that was given in Section 32.1 shows
again that the supersymmetry generators also commute with momentum.
  Lorentz invariance tellsus that for non-zero values of the p-form
'charges,'the anticommutation relations(32.1.13)and (32.1.21)-(32.1.22)
can only take the forms (in the same notation as in Section 32.1):

d odd
                                                    ■■■
         {Qr, Q]} = grsy^Px + £          ztr^y^        y,p       (32.3.2)


d even




                                                                 (32.3.3)
                     |_           oddp

            !e?.ef(-"",Tl r, _
                                    (l±J^
                          P)H2"Hp±
                  X E $            YnJn2---ynP                   (32.3.4)
                    evenp

(Recall that # appears in the anticommutation relationsbecause fjv =
—
  c€~x^ViVc€\the Qjr are supersymmetry generators in the case of even d
for which w+iQp = +Qr\ and ^_1y^+i^ = (—l)^/2y^+1.)For even d we
have
                                •••                   •••
                  ^m-Ny^y^         y^ oc w+nvj^          yN ,
while for d odd

                             yvyni'-yupKy^j^'-y^.
400         32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions

Thus p-branes and d — p branes make the same contributions in Eqs.
                for any d, so that we can restrictp to run only over values
(32.3.1)—(32.3.3)
from 0 to d/2 for d even and from 0 to (d — l)/2 for d odd.
  The symmetry of anticommutators is reflectedin symmetry conditions
on the p-brane central charges zvrsin Eqs. (32.3.2)-(32.3.4).Eqs. (32.A.15)
and (32.A.30)give
             =               ,       #T = (-1)^+1)/2^ ,          (32.3.5)
         yJ     (-i)^-1^
for both d =   2n and d = 2n + 1.These give the antisymmetrized products
       *''     the
yiMJm     y»p\     symmetry property



                    =                                                     .
                        (-ir(-l)^i)/2(_i)P(p-i)/2^iyAi2..       .y^]T
                                                                        (32.3.6)
It follows immediately that for odd d,

         ^m-fip = (.^pn^^n^+i)^^!^-!)^!^--^                 ?           (32.3.7)
while for even d,


  Consider for instance the important case of N = 1 supersymmetry in
d =  11 spacetime dimensions, which is one version of the popular M-
theory generalizationof string theories.Eq. (32.3.8)shows that the single
p-form central charge z^2"'^ vanishes unless
                       - (-l)P(-l)^"1)/2 = +1 ,                  (32.3.9)
which is satisfiedonly for p equal to 1, 2, and 5. The value p = 1 is
realizedby the momentum                    which arisesfrom particlesas
                            operator itself,
                                                 p = 2 and p = 5, arise
well as extended objects. The other possibilities,
in theorieswith 2-branes and 5-branes, respectively.Note that there can
be no other independent tensor central charges, such as a 1-form arising
from 1-branes,because the number of independent components in P^ and
in a 2-form and a 5-form is


                        „+(y)+(»)-5».
while the number of independent components in an anticommutator of
two 32-component fundamental spinors is 32 x 33/2 = 528.
  Just as the 0-form electriccharge is the source of a 1-form gauge field
i4^(x),so also a p-form conserved quantity z^^2'"^ may serve as the source
of a p + 1-form gauge fieldAilxilr..il^x
                                       of the sort discussed in Section 8.8.
In fact,such gauge fieldsdo appear in supergravity theories.For instance,
                  Appendix   Spinors in Higher Dimensions            401

as remarked in the previous section, the N = 1 supergravity theory in
d = 11 spacetime dimensions includes a massless particlewhose statesare
in the 3-form representation of the 0(9) littlegroup, and therefore must
be described by a 3-form gauge fieldA^pix). The study of solutions of
this supergravity theory shows that there are two-branes12 that indeed
do provide sources for A^pix). Also, as noted in Section 8.8,this gauge
theory is equivalent to one with a (d — p — 2 = 6)-form gauge field,which
can have the 5-form z^'"^5 as a source, and there are indeed 5-brane
solutions which provide such sources for this 6-form gauge field.13The
N = 1 eleven-dimensional supersymmetry algebra does in fact receive
contributionsfrom these 2-branes and 5-branes.11



             Appendix        Spinors in Higher Dimensions

This appendix describesthe fundamental spinor representationsof the Lie
algebra of the Lorentz group 0(d — 1,1) in any number d of spacetime
dimensions. These are obtained from the corresponding Clifford
     consisting of an irreducibleset of finitematrices y^ that satisfythe
algebra,
anticommutation relations

                              {^,yv} =2^v,                       (32.A.1)
where r\^v is diagonal, with elements +1 on the diagonal except for
j/oo= —1> where x° is the time-component. From these we can construct
matrices

                       //» = j. bv, yv] = -/vp ,               (32.A.2)
that satisfythe commutation relations(2.4.12)of the Lorentz group
generators
      ' [/^'/pffj = tfvpcf'no tfnpcrvG Werner
                                            pv i ^avcrp\i•       (32.A.3)
As we will see,although Eq. (32.A.2) always gives a representation of the
Lorentz algebra, itisnot always an irreduciblerepresentation.
  We must now distinguish between the cases of even and odd
dimensionality.


                        Even Dimensions:     d = 2n

To construct a convenient specificrepresentation for the gamma   matrices
in d = In dimensions, we introduce n matrices

                  au = x (wu-i + iy2u)     u = 1,2, ...,n ,      (32.A.4)
402          32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions

and take yi,...,yin as Hermitian, it being understood that as usual

                                yin = -iyo.                             (32.A.5)
These have the anticommutation relations

           {au, 4} = Suv,        {au, <*„}= {aM, aj} = 0 .              (32.A.6)
We introduce a vector |0)in the representationspace of the ys, defined by
the condition

                                 <4|0)=0,                               (32.A.7)
and define the basis vectors

                       \sis2 •••sn)=<fll<$---a%\0).                     (32.A.8)
Because a* = 0, the operator au raisesthe value of su to +1 ifsu = 0 and
annihilatesthe vector if su = +1 (as well as yielding a sign (—l)s where
5 = Z)t,<M5t)),so all su take only the values 0 and +1, and the vectors
therefore span a space of dimensionality 2n. In this basis,the matrices au
take the form

                                                                        (32-A-9)
  ^("o1         i)®'"®("o1            i)®(o         J)®1"-®1*
with the last 2x2   matrix in the wth place. Taking the Hermitian and
anti-Hermitian parts then gives the gamma matrices

  2m~1 =                         o1
           ( (/ ?)®'"®(                i)®(i         J)®1-"®1'(32A-10)


 yi
   ^("o1        i)®'"®("o1            i)®(?         o')®1'"®1-(32A-n)
(Note that this does not give the same representation of the gamma
matrices in four spacetime dimensions as was introduced in Section 5.4,
and has been used throughout this book.)
  The representation(32.A.10)-(32.A.11)gives the Euclidean ys the simple
realityand symmetry properties
                                 n
                    y;=yJ n = {
                    n                          f°ri:°dd
                                               for ieven   ,                '
                                                                    (32.A.12)
                                                                    v
                              \ —yt
where i = 1,2, ...,In. This can be expressed as a similarityrelation

                      V-^ff    = (-l)nyj = (-l)ny*,                 (32.A.13)
where # isthe matrix
                               ^ = y2y4...y2n.                      (32.A.14)
                Appendix          Spinors in Higher Dimensions                 403

Taking account of the factor—i in Eq. (32.A.5),we can write thisin terms
of Minkowskian components as
                       =               = -(-vrwr\w)              >        (32.A.15)
                  ?;       -hlP
where

                                     fi= y2n = -iyo •                     (32.A.16)

  In any even dimension we may define a matrix yin+x that plays a role
similarto that of 75 in four dimensions. We take
                                                 •''
                               T2n+i = inym         yin .                 (32.A.17)
The phase here ischosen so that
                                            =
                                       y22n+i 1 •                         (32.A.18)
From the anticommutation relations(32.A.1),itfollows immediately that
y2n+i anticommutes with the other gamma matrices

          {7211+1,y»} = 0         for /i= 1,2, ...,In - 1, 0 .            (32.A.19)
It is straightforward to check that y2n+i isreal and symmetric

                                 =         =      =
                       y\n+\          y*2n+\ rJn+1 72»+l •                (32.A.20)
From  Eq. (32.A.19) we see that yin+\ commutes                  with the generators
(32.A.2) of the 0(2n - 1,1) algebra:

                                  [72i.+i,/mv]=0,                         (32.A.21)
so that the /^ cannot furnish an irreduciblerepresentationof the algebra
of 0(2n — 1,1). Instead, we may define a pair of 'Weyl' irreducible
representationsby projecting out the subspaces with yin+\ = +1:

                                                                          (32.A.22)
                           /fv=/,v(^±i).
From Eq. (32.A.15)and the relation(^p^ym+i^P      = -(-l)"y2«+i we find
that the complex conjugate and transpose of the Weyl Lorentz generators
are
                                  =                                       (32.A.23)
                       {/%)"          -mrx/^-lYm),

                                       =                    ■             (32.A.24)
                           U%Y             -V-'ftt1^
Hence, for n even, the Weyl irreduciblerepresentations are equivalent to
complex conjugates of each other,while for n odd each is equivalent to its
404           32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions

own complex conjugate.* For n odd, we stillhave to decide whether the
Weyl representationsare real,which would mean that there isa matrix S?
such that
                        -                  =                ,         (32.A.25)
                             Wjv^"1)*          y/%y-X
or pseudoreal,in which case there is no such Sf. Using Eq. (32.A.23),the
condition (32.A.25)may be written as the requirement that y_1y*(^7?)_1
commutes with all f^. Since the matrices f*-v form an irreducibleset,
thiswould require that y_1y*(^7?)_1 be proportional to the unit matrix

                                 VP = a&-1Srm ,                       (32.A.26)
with a some constant. For thisto be possible,we must have

                               VP{VPY     = \a\2-l.                   (32.A.27)
But ^P = 7274 •••y2n-2,and since ally\ with ieven are imaginary, we have
                                •••                 •
        VP(VPY = (-iy W            yin-if = (~l)a 1 ,           (32.A.28)
where
            a = (n - 1) + (n - 2) + ••• + 1 = n(n - l)/2 .            (32.A.29)
Hence the Weyl representationscan only be real for n = 1 (mod 4) and
must be pseudoreal for n = 3 (mod 4).
  We also note for use in Section 32.1 that
      <T = (-i)V,           #T = (_iy*H-i)Aff 9         (g-i = (_iy*i-i)Aff 9
                                                                      (32.A.30)
and therefore Eq. (32.A.13) gives
                                     = (-l)^"1)/2^      .             (32.A.31)
                            (<gyif
  The y^ form a vector,in the sense that
                                     = -iytfvp + iyytlup,             (32.A.32)
                        L/a*v,yP]
and they have normal parity,in the sense that

        0yo£ = +yo,         PytP = -yt for i = 1,..., 2n-l      .     (32.A.33)
The anticommutation relation(32.A.1)prevents us from constructing new
tensors by taking symmetric products of ys, but itallows us to construct

*We                           of theLorentzalgebraby matrices3?^ (suchas f^
     say thatone representation
 or f+v or f~v) isthecomplexconjugateofanotherrepresentation               if
                                                            by matricesj£?J,v
 £f'v= — if*v.The minus signisincludedbecausethematricesthatrepresent
                                                                    elements
 oftheLorentzgroupintheneighborhoodoftheidentity   areoftheform 1+ \i(o^j?^,
 with(o^ realinfinitesimals.
                Appendix     Spinors in Higher Dimensions                405

antisymmetric tensors of rank up to In

                             y\iixy^'"y^p\>                    (32.A.34)
where the square brackets indicate antisymmetrization, and p < 2n. Each
has a number of independent spacetime components given by the binomial
coefficient(    ), so the totalnumber      of matrices of this type is


                                           = 22" .                  (32.A.35)
                             E   ( 2D" )

None of these vanishes (as can be seen by calculatingtheir squares) and
they allhave differentLorentz and/or parity transformation rulesand are
thereforelinearlyindependent, so any 2n x 2n matrix may be written as a
linearcombination of the 22n antisymmetric tensors (32.A.34).


                    Odd     Dimensions:     d = 2n + l

Now let us consider an odd spacetime dimensionality d = 2n + 1. We
can easily find a set of 2n + 1 Dirac n x n matrices satisfying the
anticommutation relations (32.A.1): we simply use the same y^ with
\i= 1,2,...2n — 1, 0 as for d = 2n, and add the matrix j2n+i defined by
Eq. (32.A.17).According to Eqs. (32.A.18) and (32.A.19) these gamma
matrices
      satisfythe anticommutation relations(32.A.1),with \iand v running
over the values 1,2,..., 2n — 1,0, 2n + 1, and again yo = iyin-
  Unlike the case of even dimensionality, we cannot here find any non-
trivialmatrix that commutes with all the Lorentz generators, because
Eqs. (32.A.17) and (32.A.18) show that the product of the 2n + 1 gamma
matrices istrivial:
                             •••             •
                       ym       WitWn+i = i~n 1 •                  (32.A.36)
The Lorentz generators (32.A.2) with \i and v running over the values
1,2, ...,2n — 1,0, 2n + 1 therefore furnish an irreduciblerepresentation
of the Lorentz group by themselves. To test their realityproperties,
we note that yin+\ is real and symmetric and satisfies(#/?)-1y2n+i^7?=
—(—l)ny2n+i> so Eq. (32.A.15) applies for \i = 2n + 1 as well as for
\i= 1,2,...,2n — 1, 0. The Lorentz generators therefore satisfy
                             =                 ,               (32.A.37)
                        /;v    -(^)-1/^^

                                = -^-1/^,                       (32.A.38)
                           /Jv
so in each odd dimension the fundamental spinor representation iseither
realor pseudoreal. Exactly the same argument as in the case where d = 2n
406          32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions

tellsus that the spinor representations for d = In + 1 are again real or
pseudoreal according to whether the sign (—\)a in Eq. (32.A.28) ispositive
or negative, and therefore according to Eq. (32.A.29) they are real for
n = 0 (mod 4) and n = 1 (mod 4) and pseudoreal for n = 2 (mod 4) and
n = 3 (mod 4).
  We can again construct antisymmetric tensors (32.A.34),now of rank p
up to 2n + 1, but only half of these are independent, because they obey
relations
                          ...              ...
          eHlH2~-H2n+lybiJfi2y^} k yfrp+lyHl yH2n+l]?          (32.A.39)
with e^M"'M"+i as usual totallyantisymmetric. (For d = 2n no such
relations
     are possible,because the left-and right-hand sides of Eq. (32.A.39)
have opposite parity,but this argument does not apply for d = 2n + 1,
where e^^'^n+i has even spatialparity.)The totalnumber of independent
matrices of the form (32.A.34) isnow given by

                                               = 22">              (32-a-4°)
                          E(2\+1)

so any 2n x 2n matrix may be written as a linearcombination of the n +1
independent antisymmetric tensors (32.A.34) with 0 < p < n + 1.

  Finally,we note that for either d = 2n or d = 2n + 1, the 0(d — 1,1)
Dirac and Lorentz algebras are relatedto the corresponding 0(d) algebras
by setting

                     y2n = -iy0 ,          St in = -iSto ,         (32.A.41)
so that
                                          =                        (32.A.42)
                               {yt,yj}        2Sij9
and

                               =            =                      (32.A.43)
                         Sij       li[yi,yj] Sji,
with i and j running from 1 to d. It follows from Eq. (32.A.42) that for
i =£ j, Sfj = 1/4, so the eigenvalues of each Sij are limited to +1/2. To
be more specific, in the fundamental spinor representation the generators
of the Cartan subalgebra are represented by

                    /211-12u=                          -
                                          > a*u\= au<>*u
                                       \-a"                    >   (32.A.44)
                                   2                       2
for which the basis vectors (32.A.8) are eigenvectors,with

                                                       ***    .
          /211-12u\sis2 '"Sn^=                   |5i52    fin)     (32.A.45)
                                    (su--j
                               References                             407

The differencebetween dimensionalitiesd = In and d = In + 1 is that
for d = In we have two fundamental spinor representationsin which the
                          •••
eigenvalue (—2a\)(—2gj)      (—2an) of yin+\ isconstrained to be +1 or —1,
while for d =  2n + 1 there is one fundamental spinor representation with
no such limitationon the au.
  It was the limitationof the eigenvalues of each fij to +1/2 that in
Section 32.1 identifiedthe fundamental spinor representationsas the only
possible representations of the Lorentz algebra that could be furnished
by fermionic symmetry generators. Indeed, from thiscondition we could
have inferredthat the 0(d) generators may be represented in a basis of
the form (32.A.8),with su = au + 1/2, and carried out the derivations of
this appendix in reverse order, using Eqs. (32.A.4)-(32.A.7)(along with
Eq. (32.A.17) for d odd) to express the Lorentz generators in terms of a
set of y^ satisfyingthe anticommutation relations(32.A.1).


                               Problems

  1. Classify the massless particlemultiplets for each allowed kind of
     supersymmetry in six spacetime dimensions, when allcentralcharges
     vanish.

  2. Suppose that itwere possible to have massless particlesfor allspins
     up to j = 3, but no higher. Taking into account the fact that
     massless particlesof spin 2 do exist,what isthe maximum  spacetime
     dimensionality in which supersymmetry is possible? What is the
     maximum    number of supersymmetry generators for each allowed
     value of the spacetime dimensionality?

  3. Consider types IIA and IIB supersymmetry in ten spacetime
     dimensions.
           Assume that only scalarcentralcharges appear in the extended
     supersymmetry anticommutation relations.Find a lower bound on
     particlemasses in terms of these central charges. Describe the 'BPS'
     massive particlemultipletsallowed for particleswhose masses are at
     thislower bound.

  4. List the possible independent scalar and/or tensor central charges
     for N = 1 supersymmetry in nine spacetime dimensions.


                              References

  1. T Kaluza, Sitz.Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Kl, 966 (1921).
  2. O. Klein, Z. Phys. 37, 895 (1926); Nature 118, 516 (1926).
408        32 Supersymmetry Algebras in Higher Dimensions

  3. J. H. Schwarz, Nucl. Phys. B46, 61 (1972); R. C. Brower and K. A.
     Friedman, Phys. Rev. D7, 535 (1972).
  4. The supergravity fieldtheory in 11 spacetime dimensions was
              by E. Cremmer, B. Julia,and J. Scherk, Phys. Lett. 76B,
     formulated
     409 (1978). The idea that weakly coupled Type IIA string theories
     in 10 spacetime dimensions have an 11-dimensional origin isdue to
     M. J. Duff, P. S. Howe, T Inami, and K. Stelle,Phys. Lett. B191,
     70 (1987). This was shown for strongly coupled Type IIA string
     theories in ten dimensions by P. K. Townsend, Phys. Lett. B350,
     184 (1995). Connections between these theories and all the other
     ten-dimensional stringtheorieswere then pointed out by E. Witten,
     Nucl. Phys. B445, 85 (1995).
  5. R. Haag, J. Lopuszanski, and M. Sohnius, Nucl. Phys. B88, 257
     (1975).
  6. W. Nahm,   Nucl. Phys. B135, 149 (1978).
 6a. See, for example, H. W. Turnbull and A. C. Aitkens, An Introduction
     to the Theory of Canonical Matrices (Dover Publications,New York,
      1961).
 6b. A useful summary   is given by J. Strathdee, Int.J. Mod. Phys. A2,
     273 (1987).
  7. For these arguments in four spacetime dimensions, see S. Weinberg,
     Phys. Rev. 135, B1049 (1964); Phys. Rev. 138, B988 (1965); R. P.
     Feynman, unpublished; M. T Grisaru and H. N. Pendleton, Phys.
     Lett.67B, 323 (1977).The arguments in higher spacetime dimensions
     are similiar.
  8. See, for example, J. Hughes, J. Liu, and J. Polchinski, Phys. Lett.
     B180, 370 (1986); E. Bergshoeff, E. Sezgin, P. K. Townsend, Phys.
     Lett. B189, 75 (1987); A. Achucarro, J. M. Evans, P. K. Townsend,
     and D. L. Wiltshire,Phys. Lett. B198, 441 (1987); P. K. Townsend,
     Phys. Lett. B202, 53 (1988); P. K. Townsend, in Particles,Strings,
     and Cosmology: Proceedings of Workshop on Current Problems in
     Particle Theory 19 at Johns Hopkins University,March 1995 (World
     Scientific,Singapore, 1996); J. Maldacena, Adv. Theor. Math. Phys.
     2, 231 (1998). For reviews, see M. J. Duff, R. R. Khuri, and J.-X.
     Lu, Phys. Rep. 259, 213 (1995); A. Giveon and D. Kutasov, 1998
     preprint hep-th/9802067, to be published in Rev. Mod. Phys.
  9. J. W. van Holten and A. Van Proeyen, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen. 15,
     3763 (1982).
 10. J. A. de Azcarraga, J. P. Gauntlett, J. M. Izquierdo, and P. K.
     Townsend Phys. Rev. Lett. 63, 2443 (1989).
                              References                            409

11. D. Sorokin and P. K. Townsend, Phys. Lett B412, 265 (1997); J.
    P. Gauntlett, J. Gomis, and P. K. Townsend, J. High Energy Phys.
    9801, 003 (1998).
12. The covariant fieldequations for these 2-branes were given by E.
    Bergshoeff, E. Sezgin, P. K. Townsend, Ref. 8 and Ann. Phys. (NY)
    185, 330 (1988).The demonstration that these 2-branes are solutions
    of the supergravity fieldequations that provide sources for the 3-
    form gauge fieldisdue to M. J.Duff and K. Stelle,Phys. Lett.B253,
    113 (1991).
13. The demonstration that these 5-branes are solutions of the super-
    gravityfieldequations that provide sources for the 6-form gauge field
    was given by R. Gueven, Phys. Lett. B276, 49 (1992).The covariant
    fieldequations for these 5-branes were given by M. Aganagic, J.
    Park, C. Popescu, and J. Schwarz, Nucl. Phys. B496, 191 (1997); P.
    S. Howe and E. Sezgin, Phys. Lett. B394, 62 (1997); P. Pasti, D.
    Sorokin, and M. Tonin, Phys. Lett. B398, 41 (1997); P. S. Howe, E.
    Sezgin, and P. C. West, Phys. Lett. B399, 49 (1997); I. Bandos, K.
    Lechner, A. Nurmagambetov,      P. Pasti,D. Sorokin, and M. Tonin,
    Phys. Rev. Lett.78, 4332 (1997).
                        Author           Index

             Where page numbers are given in italics,  they
            referto publications cited in listsof references.



Abreu, P. 245                            Brink,L. 177
Achucarro, A. 408                        Brower, R. C. 408
Affleck,I. 266,285,286,306, 381          Buras,A. J. 244, 245
Aganagic, M. 409
Aharonov, Y. 23                          Capper, D. M. 316
Aitkens,A. C. 408                        Carena, M. 245
Akulov, V. P. 7, 23                      Casas,J.A. 381
Alvarez-Gaume, L. 245, 380               Casher,A. 23
Amaldi, U. 243                           Chacko, Z. 381
Antoniadis,I. 241, 306                   Chamseddine, A. H. 247, 380
Arkani-Hamed N. 241, 246                 Choudhury, S. R. 244
Arnowitt,R. 244,245,247,379, 380         Chun, E. J. 246
Astbury,A. 245                           Claudson, M. 245
Axen, D. 245                             Cleaver,G. 246
                                         Cohen, A. G. 242
Babu, K. S. 244,246,247                  Coleman, S. 2, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 19,
Bagger,J. 242,243,246,306, 379              20,23, 177,330, 379
Bais,F.A. 177                            Cordes, S. F 306
Bandos, I.409                            Cox, P.H. 244
Banks, T. 242, 381                       Cremmer, E. 380, 408
Barate,R. 245                            Cvetic,J.R. 246
Barbieri,R. 244, 380
Barger, 243
        V.                               D'Adda, A. 177
Beg, M, A. 23                            Dai, J. 244
Belyaev,V. M. 247                        Das, A. 380
Bennett,J.R. J. 242                      Davis,A. C. 266, 306
Berezin,F.A. 86, 112                     Dawson, S. 243, 245
Bergshoeff,E. 408, 409                   de Azcarraga,J.A. 408
Bessis,D. 176                            de Boer, W. 243
Binetruy,P. 381                          de Luccia,F 330, 379
Bogomol'nyi,E. B. 177                    De Rujula,A. 244
Boulware, D. 380                         de Wit, B. 158,159,177
Braaten,E. 244                           Delbourgo, R. 23,316,317
Breitenlohner,P. 177                     Deser,S. 112,379, 380
Brignole,A. 245                          Di Vecchia,P. 177

                                   411
412                             Author Index

Dicus,A. 242,244, 246                    Gervais,J.-L.5, 23
Dienes,K. R. 243                         Gildener,E. 241
Dimopoulos, S. 193, 241, 242, 243,       Girardello,L. 176,178,306, 380
   244,245,246, 247                      Giudice,G. F. 226,228,242,246,380,
Dine, M. 176,244,245,246,266,285,           381
   286,306, 381                          Giunti,C. 243
Dixon, L. 242                            Giveon, A. 178,408
Donoghue, J.F. 243                       Gliozzi,F 7,23, 379
Dubovsky, S. L. 246                      Gol'fand,Yu. A. 7, 23
Duff,M. 244,245,408, 409                 Gomis, J. 112,409
Dugan, M. 244                            Gorbunov, D. S. 246
Dutta, B. 246                            Goto, T. 247
Dvali,G. 241,242, 246                    Gracia,X. 112
Dykstra,H. 244                           Green, M. B. 23
Dyson, F.J. 22                           Greene, B. 176
                                         Greenberg O. W. 23
Efthimiou,C. 176                                  P. 112
                                         Griffiths,
Ellis,J. 188, 242, 243, 244, 245, 246,   Grimm,  R.  177
   247, 380                              Grinstein, 244
                                                   B .
Espinosa,J.R. 246                        Grisaru,M. T. 45, 54, 112, 176, 317,
Evans, J.M. 408                             379, 408
Everett,L. 246                           Grossman, Y. 244
                                         Grunewald, M. 245
Farrar,G. 242                            Gueven, R. 409
Fayet,P. 176,177,242, 380                Gunion, J.F 243, 246
Feng, J.L. 242                           Gursey, F 22
Ferrara,S. 23, 54, 112, 176,242, 244,
   305,306,316,379, 380                  Haag, R. 24,25,53,54,382,383, 408
Feynman, R. P. 408                       Haber, H. E. 243, 246
Fischler,W. 176,245                      Hagelin,J.S. 242,244, 247
Freed,D. 112                             Hall,L. J. 243,244, 380
Freedman, D. Z. 158, 159, 177, 379,      Halperin,A. 177
   380                                   Hamaguchi, K. 381
Friedman, K. A. 408                      Harada, K. 176
Fujikawa,K. 316                          Harris,J. 112
Furstmann, H. 243                        Harris,P.G. 244
                                         He, X.-G. 244
Gabbiani, F. 244, 245                    Heinemayer, S. 245
Gabrielli,E. 244, 245                    Hisano, J. 242, 247
Gaillard, K. 203,244,381
         M.                              Hollik,W. 245
Galperin,A. 306                          Honerkamp, J. 316
Gatto, R. 244                            Horava, P. 243
Gauntlett,J.P. 408, 409                  Horsley,R. 177
Gava, E. 306                             Howe, P. 177,408,409
Gavela, M. B. 244                        Hughes, J. 249,306, 408
Gell-Mann, M. 1,23,24, 152
Georgi,H. 193,242,243, 245               Ibanez,L. E. 247, 380
                             Author Index                            413

Ibrahim,T. 244                      Lindgren,O. 177
Iliopoulos,J. 112, 176              Lindner,M. 244
Inami,T. 408                        Liu,J. 249,306, 408
            K. 306
Intrilligator,                      Lopez, J. 244
Ivanov,E. A. 177                    Lopuszanski,J.T. 24,25, 53, 54, 382,
Izawa, K. I.381                        383, 408
Izquierdo,J.M. 408                  Louis,J. 381
                                    Low 152
Julia,B. 177,380, 408               Lu, J.-X.408
                                    Lucas, V. 247
Kac, V. G. 279, 306                 Luo, M.-X. 243
Kagan, A. 244, 245                  Luty,M. A. 246,380, 381
Kaluza, T. 382, 407                 Lykken, J. 241, 380
Kane, G. L. 243
Kaplan, D. B. 242,381               Maclntire,D. A. 381
Kaplunovsky, V. 381                 Maksymyk, I.381
Karlen,D. 245                       Maldacena, J. 408
Katz, E. 380                        Mandelstam, S. 177
Kay, J.H. 380                       Mandula, J. 2, 12, 13, 14, 15, 17, 19,
Kelley,S. 243, 244                     20,23
Khuri, R. R. 408                    Manohar, A. 245
Kim, C. W. 243                      March-Russell,J. 244
Kim, J.E. 246,381                   Martin, S. P. 243, 246
Kizuri,Y. 244                       Masiero, A. 242,244,245,381
Klein,O. 382,407                    Matchev, K. T. 243
Kolb, E. W. 242                     McGlinn, W. D. 23
Kolda, C. 242,243,244, 246          McKellar, S. R. 244
Kounnas, C. 380                     Michel,L. 23
Kovacs, S. 178                      Misiak,M. 245
Krause, F. 316                      Mohapatra, R. N. 242
Kurosawa, K. 242                    Montonen, C. 174,177
Kutasov, D. 408                     Moroi, T. 381
                                    Munoz, C. 247, 381
Lahanas, A. B. 380                  Miinz, M. 245
Lang, W. 247, 316                   Murayama, H. 247, 380
Langacker,P. 243,246, 247
Le Yaouanc, A. 244                  Nahm, W. 379,383,408
Lechner,K. 409                      Nandi, S. 246
Lee, B. W. 203,242, 244             Nanopoulos, D. V. 242,243,244,245,
Lee, U. W. 243                         247,380
Leibrandt,G. 316                    Nappi, C. 245
Leigh,R. 244                        Nath, P. 244,247,379, 380
Leon, J.M. 380                      Ne'erman, Y. 1,24
Lepeintre,F. 242                    Nelson, A. E. 242,246, 381
Levy, M. 112                        Neveu, A. 5,23, 177
Li,C. S. 244                        Nihei,T. 247
Likhtman, E. P. 7, 23               Nilles,H. P. 176,242,243,246, 380
414                            Author Index

Nilsson,B. E. W. 177                    Raby, S. 176,242,243,245,246, 247
Nir,Y. 244,245, 246                     Radicatti,L. A. 22
Nomura, Y. 242, 381                     Ramon Medrano, M. 380
Novikov, V. A. 306                      Ramond, P. 5, 23
Nurmagambetov, A. 409                   Randall,L. 245,380, 381
                                        Rarita,W. 333, 380
O'Raifeartaigh,L. 23,83, 112            Rattazzi,R. 226,228,244,246, 380
Ogievetsky,V. I. 177                    Raynal, J.-C.244
Ohta, N. 380                            Ridolfi,G. 245
Olive,D. 7,23, 174,177,242                     A.
                                        Riotto, 242
Oliver,L. 244                           Robinson, J. 245
Osborn, H. 177, 178                     Rocek, M. 176,177,317
Oshimo, N. 244                          Ross, G. 247
Ovrut, B. 245                           Rossi,G. C. 306
                                        Roszkowski, L. 246
Paban, S. 244, 245                      Rudaz, S. 247
Pagels,H. 243
Pais,A. 22, 23                          Sakai,N. 176,243, 246
Pakvasa,S. 244                          Sakita,B. 5,22, 23
Palumbo, F. 176                         Salam, A. 23,55,59,60, 112,176,242,
Panvini,R. S. 243                          316
Park,J. 409                             Samuel, S. 245
Parke,S. 177                            Sarid,U. 243
Partouche,H. 306                        Savoy, C. A. 380
Pasti,P. 409                            Scherk,J. 7,23, 177,379,380, 408
Pati,J.C. 247                           Scheunert,M. 316
Peccei,R. D. 242                        Schlindwein,M. 316
Pendleton,H. N. 45,54,379, 408          Schwarz, J.H. 5,23, 177,408, 409
Pene, O. 244                            Schwinger,J. 177,333, 380
Pham, T. N. 244                         Seiberg,N. 148, 176, 177, 226, 244,
Piguet,O. 316                              246, 266, 285, 286, 287, 291, 292,
Pokorski,S. 245                            299,302,303,306,307, 381
Polchinski,J. 23, 176, 242, 244, 249,   Sen, A. 178
   306,380, 408                         Sezgin,E. 408, 409
Polonsky,N. 242,243, 246                Shadmi, Y. 380
Polonyi,J. 380                          Shifman, M. A. 306
Pomerol, A. 242,246, 380                Shirman, Y 245,246, 380
Pons,J. 112                             Siegel,W. 176,177,317
Ponton, E. 381                                     L. 244, 245
                                        Silvestrini,
Popescu,C. 409                          Smilga,A. V. 279, 306
Porrati,M. 178,306                      Smith, J.R. 241
Prasad,M. K. 177                        Smith, P.F. 242
Primack, J.R. 177,243                   Sohnius, M. 24, 25, 53, 54, 177, 382,
                                           383, 408
Quinn, H. 242, 243                      Sola,J. 243
Quiros,M. 245,380                       Sommerfield,C. M. 177
                                Author Index                               415

Soper,D. E. 243, 306                     Vysotsky,M. I. 247
Soroka,V. 379                            Wagner, C. E. M. 245
Sorokin,D. 409                           Wali, K. C. 23
Srednicki,M. 242,245,380                 Wang, J. 246
Stelle,K. S. 177, 244, 245, 379, 380,    Weiglein,G, 245
   408,409                               Weiler,T. J. 243
Strathdee,J. 23, 55, 59, 60, 112, 176,   Weinberg, S. 23, 176, 241, 242, 243,
   242,316, 408                             244,245,246,379,380, 408
Sundrum, R. 380, 381                     Wells,J.D. 246
Susskind,L. 23, 176                      Wess, J. 6, 7, 8, 23, 59, 83, 112, 176,
Sutter,D. 243, 244                          379
Symanzik, K. 176                         West, P.C. 177,379,380, 409
                                         Wigner, E. P. 1,10,22
Takita,M. 247                            Wilczek, F. 242, 243, 244, 245, 246,
Tamvakis, K. 246,247,380                    247
Tanaka, T. 244                           Wiltshire,D. L. 408
Taylor,T. R. 306                         Wise, M. B. 244,245,380
Teitelboim,C. 379                        Witten,E. 23, 177,178,243,249,278,
Teplitz,V. L. 242                           287, 291, 292, 294, 299, 302, 303,
Thomas, S. 245, 246                         305,306, 408
Tommasini, D. 242                        Wolfram, S. 242
Tonin, M. 409                            Wu, Y.-Y. 381
Townsend, P.K. 177,380,408, 409          Wyler, D. 243, 380
Troitsky,S.V. 246
Turnbull,H. W. 408                       Yanagida, T. 246,247, 381
                                         Yildiz,A. 244
Vafa,C. 178                              Yuan, T. C. 244
Vainshtein,A. I.306
van der Waerden 30                       Zaffaroni,A. /78
van Holten,J.W. 408                      Zakharov, V. I.306
van Nieuwenhuizen, P. 242, 379,          Zee, A. 177,246
   380                                   Zhang, R.-J.242, 244
Van Proeyen,A. 380, 408                  Zumino, B. 6,7,8,23,54,59,83, 106,
Vegas, F.J. 244                             112,176,379, 380
Veneziano,G. 306                         Zwanziger,D. 177
Volkov, D. V. 7,23,379                   Zwirner,F. 245, 246
                          Subject         Index




Ah terms,199-201,234,341, 363               of generalsuperfields,
                                                                 61-64
anomalies,45, 101, 147, 181, 267-8,         of metricsuperfield,
                                                               322-3
   294, 339                               conformal symmetry
anomaly-mediated      supersymmetry         in 2 dimensions,5
   breaking,337^1, 364                      in 4 dimensions,21-2
anti-deSitterspace,330                    connectionmatrix T, 114
auxiliaryfields,
               59, 78, 119, 133, 145,     cosmic abundances, 186-8
   323,327-8, 350                         cosmologicalconstant,157, 348, 359,
axion,see Peccei-Quinnsymmetry                371
                                          covariantderivativeD^ 343-4
Baker-Hausdorff formula,115
                                          CP-non-conservation,204-9, 234
baryon and lepton number non-             CP-odd scalarA, 214
   conservation,182-4,235-40              currentsuperfields,89-90
baryon parity,240                         curvatureR^    in vierbeinformalism,
/?angle,defined,213                           378
bino,180,222-6,229,238,340, 364
B\xterm, 199-201,211,232-3, 363           D-terms in action,65, 72, 76-7, 87,
BPS states,52-53, 166,300
                                              103-5,347
^-matrix,108,402                          de Wit-Freedman       transformation,
Cartan subalgebra,163,280                     158-60
CasimirconstantsC\ and C2,267,278-        de Sitterspace,330
    9                                     Dirac matrices,xx-xxi,401-7
centralcharges,30-1,35-6,163-5,296,       dotted indices,xx, 30
    385-6,389-92, 398^01                  duality,1 74-5,292^
  alsosee BPS states                      dyons, 167,297, 300-2
Ch terms,199-201,234,363, 374
charginos,219-20                          Einstein-Hilbertaction,328
chiralsuperfields,
                 68-74, 346-7                               326-7
                                          Einsteinsuperfield,
Coleman-Mandula theorem,2, 12-21,         Einsteintensor,326, 332
    382, 397-8                                   dipole moments, see CP-non-
                                          electric
collapsedsupermultiplet,48, 51               conservation
complexificationof symmetries,106-7,      electroweaksymmetry breaking,180—
    135                                      1,219
component fields                          energy-momentum tensor 7^v, 98-99,
  of chiralsuperfields,
                      68-72                  324

                                    416
                             Subject Index                              417

extended supersymmetry, 36, 45-7,      Higgs fieldsand superfields,180-1,
    160-75                                210-9, 226-32
  alsosee Seiberg-Wittensolution       higgsinos,181,183, 190-2
external fieldtranslationsymmetry,     holomorphy arguments, 150, 226-7,
    150-1,268                             266-76
                                                      46-7, 167,300
                                       hypermultiplets,
F-parameter of broken
          258-9, 336-7
   supersymmetry,                      instantons,131-2,268,270,284, 295
J^-termsin action,72,77-8,87,125-6,
                                       Jacobiand super-Jacobiidentities,
                                                                      26
    131,141H 181-2,185,348
Fayet-Iliopoulosterms,124,144,152-
                                       Kahler manifolds,106-7
   3
                                       Kahler metric,105,350
         of N = 4 theories,
finiteness                  174
flatdirections,                          modified,352-3
              84-5, 154, 163           Kahler potential,73, 102-6,349
flavor-changingprocesses, 198-201,                352-3
   218                                   modified,

                                       left-chiral         seechiralsuper-
                                                superfields,
gauge-mediatedsupersymmetry               fields
        220-35
    breaking,                          lepton number non-conservation,see
gauge superfieldWa, 125-7, 130-1          baryon and lepton number non-
gauginos, 119, 143^, 189, 281, 339,       conservation
    363H 374-5                                          180
                                       leptonsuperfields,
  gaugino condensation,284-5, 366      linearsuperfields,
                                                       75,90
  alsosee gluinos,winos,binos          little      393
                                            group,
Gell-Mann-Low equations,see renor-     localsupersymmetry,93-4, 341-3
    malizationgroup equations
generalized gauge transformations,     M theory,382,395,400-1
    116-7                              magnetic monopoles, 52, 166-7, 294,
generalizedsupersymmetric quantum          300-2
    chromodynamics, 267, 270-4         Majorana potential,  10
gluino,180,222-6,229,237,340, 364      Majorana spinors, x     58,81, 107-11
                                                           viii,
goldstino,85,147-8,234,251,256,259,    masses
    262-4                                for broken supersymmetry, 145-8,
graded Lie algebras,25-9                   193^
  alsosee supersymmetry algebras         for unbroken supersymmetry, 136—
gravitino,45, 188, 196-8,234, 320-6,       40
    333-7,349,356,359, 368               sum rule,147, 192
gravity-mediated      supersymmetry      alsosee charginos,gauginos,Higgs
    breaking,355-75                        fields, neutralinos, sleptons,
                                           squarks,gravitino
Haag-Lopuszanski-Sohnius theorem,      messenger superfields,220-2, 224
   30-40                               metricsuperfield H^  319-26
heterotic            397
         supergravity,                 minimal supersymmetric standard
hidden sector,195,355-7, 365               model, 198-240
hierarchyproblem, 179,185,194,355-     modular fields,287-8, 365
   6                                   monodromy,   299-304
418                           Subject Index

Montonen-Olive duality, see duality    reduced couplingconstants,208
/i-term,185,210,220,232-3,361, 368                     conditions,76
                                       renormalizability
multiplicationrules,64,71-72, 346-7    renormalizationgroup equations,149,
                                          173^, 188-92,269,279, 339
naivedimensionalanalysis, 208          right-chiral          see chiral
                                                  superfields,
naturalnessbounds, 186                    superfields
           219-30
neutralinos,
next-to-lightest
              supersymmetric           scalenon-invariancesuperfieldX, 97,
       234-5
   particle,                               324, 338
non-lineartr-models,106-7
                                       Seiberg-Wittensolution,287-305
non-renormalizationtheorems, 148—      short supermultiplets, see BPS states
   55,269, 313-6                       SL(2,Z) symmetry, 296
no-scaletheories,
                354
                                       sleptons,180,189,223-4,229,363,374
                                       space inversion, see parity
on shellsymmetries,79, 169
                                       sparticles,43
O'Raifeartaighmodels,83-5,252-6          alsosee gauginos,squarks,sleptons,
                                           higgsinos,charginos,neutralinos
p branes,397^01
parity                                 spin,in higherdimensions,393,401-7
  in Wess-Zumino model, 83             spin connectioncojf,343-4, 377
  of component fields66, 74            squarks,180,186,189,223-4,229,363,
  of superfields,                          374
                66, 74
  of supersymmetry generators,41-42    strings,4-7, 175, 183, 240, 365, 382,
                                           396-7
Peccei-Quinnsymmetry, 185,214,232,
    361-2,365,368, 373                 SU(4) symmetry, in nuclearphysics,1,
                                           10
photino,277
  alsosee bino and wino                SU(6) symmetry, in quark model, 1,
                                           8-12
potentialof scalarfields,
                        79,84-5,134,
                                       sum rulesfor supersymmetry current,
    144,163,352^, 362, 371-2
                                           256-66
potentialsuperfields,88-9,308-9,359,
    361                                superconformalsymmetry
             291                         in 2 dimensions,6
prepotential,
                                         in 4 dimensions,38-40
proton decay, see baryon and lepton
    number non-conservation            supercurrent0", 90,96-102,321,323-
                                           5
quantum chromodynamics, see            superderivatives ^a, defined,64-5
   generalized
           supersymmetric quantum      superfields,59-68
   chromodynamics, gluino,squark         fieldequations,96-7
                180
quark superfields,                       also see chiral superfields, current
                                           superfields,linear superfields,
K-symmetry, 36-7, 40, 45, 74-5, 84,        potential
                                                   superfields,gauge super-
    161,171-3,182,267-8,284-5,290-         fields,Higgs superfields,quark
    2,392                                            lepton superfields,
                                           superfields,
  current#", 100-1                         messenger
                                                   superfields, metric super-
  K-parity,184,236                         field,supercurrent, Einsteinsuper-
Rarita-Schwinger equation, 333-5,          field,scale-non-invariance  super-
    344                                    field
                              Subject Index                             419

supergraphs,307-16                         also see gauge-mediated
supergravity, 45,318-9, 395                  supersymmetry
                                                    breaking,gravity-mediated
  forweak fields, 319-43                     supersymmetry          breaking,
  to allorders,343-55                        anomaly-mediated supersymmetry
  alsoseegravitino, anomaly-mediated         breaking
    supersymmetry breaking,gravity-      surfacetension,330-1
    mediated supersymmetry breaking,
    heteroticsupergravity,types IIA      types IIA and IIB supergravity,
                                                                       396-7
    and IIB supergravity
supermultiplets                          unconventionalsymmetries,1-4
  massive particlesin 4 dimensions,      unification
                                                   of strong and electroweak
    48-52
                                            couplins,188-92,221
  massless particlesin 4 dimensions,
                                                 gauge, 136
                                         unitarity
    43-7
  massless particlesin higher
                                         vacuum energy density,33, 249-51,
          393-7
    dimensions,
                                            257-8,264-6,329-31, 333
superpotential, 73,82, 149-52,266-76
                   see supergraphs               319, 375-6
                                         vierbein,
superpropagators,
superspace, 60
  fieldequations87-9                     weight,defined,383
           86                            Wess-Zumino gauge, 117-9, 159-60
  integrals
  alsosee superfields,                     for supergravity,
                                                           323, 341
                      superderivatives
             see strings                 Wess-Zumino model, 6-7,58-9,82-3,
superstrings,
                                             252
supersymmetry
  algebras,xx,29^0, 382-93               Weyl group, 282
  currentS"(x),90-3, 140-1,248, 324      Weyl transformation, 331-3, 351
                                         Wilsonian Lagrangian,149-52,268
  gauge theories, 101-76,276-87, 353
             s ee
  generators, algebras                   winding number v, 132,268,270,284,
                                             295
  history,1,4-8
  alsoseeextendedsupersymmetry,          wino, 180,222-6,229,238,340, 364
                minimal supersymmet-     Witten index,251-6, 277-285
    supergravity,
    ricstandardmodel
supersymmetry breaking                   X superfield,
                                                     see scale-non-invariance
  partialbreaking,249-50                    superfield
  softbreaking,155-7, 199-201
  spontaneous breaking,7-8,80, 134-      zino,see bino and wino
    6, 153-5,194-5,248-56, 276-87        Z8 symmetry, 295, 298
