  University of California at San Diego – Department of Physics – Prof. John McGreevy

                 General Relativity (225A) Fall 2013
                          Assignment 1

Posted September 29, 2013                                               Due Monday, Oct 7, 2013



  1. Show that
                                         lmn Rli Rmj Rnk = det Rijk
     for any 3 × 3 matrix R.
     (Recall that the determinant is a scalar function of square matrices which is odd
     under interchange of rows and columns and has det 1 = 1. And ijk is the completely
     antisymmetric collection of numbers with 123 = 1.)
  2. Show that the Maxwell equations (in Minkowski space)
                                             1
                                 ijk ∂j Ek + ∂t Bi = 0, ∂i Hi = 0
                                             c
                                           1       4π
                            ijk ∂j Bk − ∂t Ei =      Ji , ∂i Ei = 4πρ.
                                           c        c
     are invariant under the following set of transformations:
                           xi    7→     x̃i ≡ Rij xj ,     R ∈ O(3)
                       Ei (x)     7→    Ẽi (x̃) = Rij Ej (x)
                       Bi (x)      7→   B̃i (x̃) = det RRij Bj (x)
                        ρ(x)    7→      ρ̃(x̃) = ρ(x), Ji (x) 7→ J˜i (x̃) = Rij Jj (x).      (1)

     That is, E ~ is a polar vector and B
                                        ~ is an axial vector. Recall that an O(3) matrix
                 T
     satisfies R R = 1.
  3. Prove the identity                                          
                                                      δil δim δin
                                    ijk lmn = det  δjl δjm δjn  .
                                                     δkl δkm δkn
     Use this identity to show that
                                          ijk lmk = δil δjm − δim δjl .

  4. Lorentz contraction exercise [from Brandenberger]

      (a) Suppose frame S 0 moves with velocity v relative to frame S. A projectile in frame
          S 0 is fired with velocity v 0 at an angle θ0 with respect to the forward direction
          of motion (~v ). What is this angle θ measured in S? What if the projectile is a
          photon?

                                                     1
    (b) An observer A at rest relative to the fixed distant stars sees an isotropic distri-
        bution of stars in a galaxy which occupies some region of her sky. The number of
        stars seen within an element of solid angle dΩ is
                                                       N
                                              P dΩ =      dΩ
                                                       4π
         where N is the total number of stars that A can see. Another observer B moves
         uniformly along the z axis relative to A with velocity v. Letting θ0 and ϕ0 be
         respectively the polar (with respect to ẑ) and azimuthal angle in the inertial
         frame of B, what is the distribution function P 0 (θ0 , ϕ0 ) such that P 0 (θ0 , ϕ0 )dΩ0 is
         the number of stars seen by B in the solid angle dΩ0 = sin θ0 dθ0 dϕ0 .
     (c) Check that when integrating the distribution function over the sphere in the
         coordinates of B you obtain N ! Discuss the behavior of the distribution P 0 in the
         limiting cases when the velocity v goes to 0 or to 1.

 5. Show that the half of the Maxwell equations

                                           0 = µνρσ ∂ν Fρσ

   is invariant under the general coordinate transformation,
                                                                    ∂xρ ∂xσ
                    xµ 7→ x̃µ = f µ (x),   Fµν (x) 7→ F̃µν (x̃) =               Fρσ (x)
                                                                    ∂ x̃µ ∂ x̃ν
   for an arbitrary f µ (x) with non-zero Jacobian.


The following problems are optional.


 6. Eötvös
   What is the optimal latitude at which to perform the Eötvös experiment?

 7. Poincaré group
   Show that the Poincaré group satisfies all the properties of a group. (That is: it has
   an identity, it is closed under the group law, it is associative, and every element has
   an inverse in the group.)




                                               2
