  University of California at San Diego – Department of Physics – Prof. John McGreevy

                   General Relativity (225A) Fall 2013
                            Assignment 2

Posted October 3, 2013                                          Due Monday, October 15, 2013


   1. Special relativity reminders
       This problem is optional. Do it if you have to think about it or if you find it a useful
       reminder.
                                                                                                i
        (a) Derive the special relativity addition law for coordinate velocities dx
                                                                                  dt
                                                                                     using the
            Lorentz transformation x̃µ = Λµν xν .
       (b) Beginning with the assumption that the speed of light is constant, derive the time
           dilation effect as follows. Build a clock by bouncing a light ray between mirrors.
           Watch the clock tick in a frame which is boosted transverse to the motion of the
           light.

   2. Electric-magnetic (Poincaré) duality
       The vacuum Maxwell equations
                                          0 = µνρσ ∂ν Fρσ , 0 = ∂µ F µν
       are invariant under the exchange of the electric and magnetic fields ( ~
                                                                             E, ~
                                                                                B) 7→ ( ~
                                                                                       B, − ~
                                                                                           E).
                                                   1
       This is called ‘electric-magnetic duality’.
       Show that the duality transformation can be written in a covariant manner as
                                                          1
                                          Fµν 7→ (?F )µν ≡ µν·· F ·· .
                                                          2
       Verify that the (vacuum) Maxwell equations are invariant under this replacement.
       Check that doing the duality map twice gives −1: ? (?F ) = −F .

   3. Show that E~2 − B~ 2 and E~ ·B
                                   ~ are respectively scalar and pseudo-scalar under the
      Lorentz group by expressing them in terms of Fµν .
   4. Lorentz transformations of the EM fields
       This problem is to convince yourself that the formula we gave for the Lorentz trans-
       formation of the Maxwell field strength:
                                 Fµν (x) 7→ F̃µν (x̃) , Fµν (x) = Λρµ Λσν F̃ρσ (x̃)                       (1)
       is correct, i.e. it is a Lorentz tensor.
   1
   In the presence of electric charges, the duality transformation is only a symmetry if we allow for magnetic
monopole charge; the duality transformation then must exchange electric charges and magnetic charges.


                                                      1
        (a) Consider the case where Λ is a Lorentz boost in some direction. What trans-
            formation laws does this imply for the components of the electric field along the
            boost Ek ? And the component transverse to the boost E⊥ ?
       (b) Describe a charge configuration which creates a constant electric field in some
           region of space.
        (c) For the electric field case, boost the charge configuration along the direction of the
            field and transverse to the direction of the field, and find the new fields that they
            create. You may assume the experimental fact that electric charge is a scalar
            quantity. Convince yourself that they agree with the answers from the fancy
            formula (1), in the case where there is no magnetic field.
       (d) Admit to yourself that magnetic charge could exist. Use this fact and the idea in
           problem 2 to figure out how Bk and B⊥ transform in the absence of an electric
           field.
        (e) Consider current in a neutral wire made from negative charge per unit length
            λ (‘electrons’) moving at velocity vdrift superposed with a static positive charge
            density. What field does this create? By boosting to the rest frame of the negative
            charges, find the transformation rule for E⊥ , B⊥ when both are nonzero.

   5. Easy. Consider the worldline of a particle which sits at the origin for all time. In lecture
      we showed that a tangent vector to this curve has negative proper length-squared,
                                                      dxµ dxν
                                                ηµν           <0,
                                                      dτ dτ
      where τ is an arbitrary parameter along the worldline. That is, the tangent vector is
      timelike. How do I know that a Lorentz boost cannot take this vector to one which is
      spacelike?

   6. Light-cone accounting

        (a) Show that any timelike vector uµ for which u0 > 0 and uµ uµ = −1 is the four-
            velocity of some worldline.
       (b) Use the previous result to show that for any timelike vector v µ there is a Lorentz
           frame in which v µ has zero spatial components.
        (c) Show that the sum of any two orthogonal2 spacelike vectors is spacelike.
       (d) Show that a (nonzero) timelike vector and a (nonzero) null vector cannot be
           orthogonal.




   2
     Note that the assumption of orthogonal is necessary: otherwise V = (v 0 , ~v ) and Ṽ ≡ (v 0 , −~v ) is a
counterexample.


                                                       2
