MATHEMATICAL TRIPOS                          Part III

Monday, 31 May, 2021   12:00 pm to 3:00 pm



                            PAPER 301


               QUANTUM FIELD THEORY

  Before you begin please read these instructions carefully

  Candidates have THREE HOURS to complete the written examination.

               Attempt no more than THREE questions.
                  There are FOUR questions in total.
                   The questions carry equal weight.




STATIONERY REQUIREMENTS                  SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS
Cover sheet                              None
Treasury tag
Script paper
Rough paper



             You may not start to read the questions
              printed on the subsequent pages until
              instructed to do so by the Invigilator.
                                               2

1     State and prove Noether’s theorem for the theory of a real scalar field φ(x) with
Lagrangian density of the form,
                                        1
                                L =       ∂µ φ ∂ µ φ − V (φ)
                                        2

       i) Construct conserved currents corresponding to infinitesimal spacetime transla-
tions of the form xµ → xµ − εµ where εµ is a constant four vector and use them to define
the total energy, E, and 3-momentum P, carried by the field. Using Noether’s theorem,
show that E and P are time-independent provided that the fields and their derivatives
decay sufficiently fast at spatial infinity.
       ii) Find conserved currents corresponding to infinitesimal Lorentz transformations
of the form, xµ → xµ − ω µν xν where ω µν = −ω νµ is a constant antisymmetric tensor.
Write down the explicit form of ω µν corresponding to an infinitesimal rotation around the
z-axis. Hence find an expression for the value of the z-component of angular momentum
carried by the field.
      iii) Find the most general form of the potential V (φ) for which the theory has an
additional symmetry under which xµ → λxµ and,

                                  φ(x) → λ−1 φ(λ−1 x)

for any λ > 0 and find the corresponding conserved current.


2     The scalar Yukawa theory describes the interactions of a complex scalar field Φ(x)
of mass M and a real scalar field φ(x) of mass µ with Lagrangian density,

                                            1           µ2
                L = ∂µ Φ? ∂ µ Φ − M 2 Φ? Φ + ∂µ φ∂ µ φ − φ2 − λφΦ? Φ
                                            2           2
where Φ? is the complex conjugate of Φ and λ is a coupling constant.
      Consider the scattering process Φ(p) + φ(k) → Φ(p0 ) + φ(k 0 ), where p, k, p0 6= p and
k 0 6= k denote the four-momenta of the initial and final state particles. By applying Dyson’s
formula and Wick’s theorem, evaluate the scattering amplitude for this process to leading
non-vanishing order in λ. In your answer you should identify the Wick contractions and
the terms in the mode expansion of each field which yield non-zero contributions at this
order. You may quote without proof any results from the lectures regarding the canonical
quantization of scalar fields that you may need.




                                                                         Part III, Paper 301
                                                  3

3     In this question we consider a Lorentz transformation xµ → Λµν xν specified by an
element,
                                                      
                                            1       ρσ
                               Λ = exp        Ωρσ M
                                            2

of the Lorentz group where,

                              (Mρσ )µν    = η ρµ η σν − η σµ η ρν

are the Lorentz generators and Ωρσ = −Ωσρ are real parameters. The Clifford algebra is
generated by 4 × 4 matrices γ µ , µ = 0, 1, 2, 3 obeying the relations,

                           {γ µ , γ ν } := γ µ γ ν + γ ν γ µ = 2η µν 14

where 14 is the 4 × 4 unit matrix. The matrices γ µ can be chosen to obey γ µ† = γ 0 γ µ γ 0 .
We also define γ 5 := −iγ 0 γ 1 γ 2 γ 3 .
        i) Define Lorentz generators S µν in the spinor representation and show that they
obey,

                                [S µν , γ ρ ] = γ µ η νρ − γ ν η ρµ

Hence define the spinor representation of the Lorentz group by specifying a 4 × 4 matrix
S[Λ] representing Λ. [You do not need to prove that it is a representation]. Show that the
hermitian conjugate S † [Λ] of the matrix S[Λ] and its inverse S −1 [Λ] obey,

                                    S † [Λ] = γ 0 S −1 [Λ]γ 0

     ii) Let ψ(x) be a Dirac spinor field. Give the transformation of ψ(x) under Λ and
deduce the corresponding transformations of ∂µ ψ(x) and of the Dirac adjoint field ψ̄(x).
       iii) Write down the Dirac action for a spinor field ψ(x) of mass m and prove that it
is invariant under infinitesimal Lorentz transformations defined by expanding Λ to linear
order in the parameters Ωσρ .
      iv) The parity transformation P under which xµ = (t, x) → (t, −x) acts on the
Dirac spinor field as,

                              P :       ψ(t, x) → γ 0 ψ(t, −x)

Determine the action of P on each component of JVµ (t, x) := ψ̄(x)γ µ ψ(x) and of
JAµ (t, x) := ψ̄(x)γ 5 γ µ ψ(x), for µ = 0, 1, 2, 3.




 Part III, Paper 301                                                       [TURN OVER]
                                             4

4
      a) Starting from an appropriate mode expansion of the Heisenberg picture field
operator Âµ (x), which you may state without proof, derive the following integral repres-
entation of the photon propagator in Feynman gauge,
                   h           i        Z
                     µ     ν                 d4 k −iη µν
              h0|T Â (x)Â (y) |0i =            4
                                                          exp [−ik · (x − y)]
                                         CF (2π)     k2

where you should specify, with appropriate justification, the contour CF .
      b) A complex scalar field Φ(x) of mass M has Lagrangian density,

                               L = ∂µ Φ? ∂ µ Φ − M 2 Φ? Φ

where Φ? is the complex conjugate of Φ. Identify a U (1) global symmetry of this theory
and explain what it means to gauge this symmetry. By defining an appropriate covariant
derivative, write down a gauge-invariant Lagrangian density describing the complex scalar
field Φ(x) coupled to an electromagnetic field with four-vector potential Aµ (x) and gauge
coupling e.
      Identify the interaction terms in the Lagrangian and, by considering how each
of these terms contributes to scattering amplitudes, write down the momentum-space
Feynman rules for this theory. You should specify the Feynman rules associated to
internal lines and vertices appearing in Feynman diagrams. You are not required to
discuss additional factors corresponding to external lines.



                                  END OF PAPER




                                                                       Part III, Paper 301
