University of California at San Diego – Department of Physics – Prof. John McGreevy
                     Physics 215B QFT Winter 2025
                              Assignment 3
                                                Due 11:59pm Tuesday, January 28, 2025

  1. Brain-warmer.
        Use the Clifford algebra to show that in 3+1 dimensions

                                  γ µ xp/ + m γµ = −2xp/ + 4m
                                             

        where as usual p/ ≡ pµ γµ . This identity will be useful in the numerator of the
        electron self-energy.

  2. An example of renormalization in classical physics.
        Consider a classical scalar field in D + 2 spacetime dimensions coupled to an
        impurity (or defect or brane) in D dimensions, located at X = (xµ , 0, 0). Suppose
        the field has a self-interaction which is localized on the defect. For definiteness
        and calculability, we’ll consider the simple (quadratic) action
                             Z                                             
                                 D+2     1          M           2      2
                    S[φ] = d         X     ∂M φ(X)∂ φ(X) + gδ (~x⊥ )φ (X) .
                                         2
        Here X M = (xµ , xi⊥ ), µ = 0..D − 1, i = 1, 2, i.e. x⊥ are coordinates transverse to
        the impurity.

         (a) What is the mass dimension of the coupling g? This is why I picked a
             codimension1 -two defect.
         (b) Find the equation of motion for φ. Where have you seen an equation like
             this before?
         (c) We will study the propagator for the field in a mixed representation:
                                                    Z
                                                                µ
                     Gk (x, y) ≡ hφ(k, x)φ(−k, y)i = dD z eikµ z hφ(z, x)φ(0, y)i

              – i.e. we go to momentum space in the directions in which translation sym-
              metry is preserved by the defect. Find and evaluate the diagrams contribut-
              ing to Gk (x, y) in terms of the free propagator Dk (x, y) ≡ hφ(k, x)φ(−k, y)ig=0 .
              (We will not need the full form of Dk (x, y).) Note that there are no loop
              diagrams, and in this sense, all the physics here is classical. Sum the series.
              I found it convenient to do this problem in Euclidean spacetime, so G and
              D are Euclidean propagators.
  1
      An object whose position requires specification of p coordinates has codimension p.


                                                   1
       (d) You should find that your answer to part 2c depends on Dk (0, 0), which
           is divergent. This divergence arises from the fact that we are treating the
           defect as infinitely thin, as a pointlike object – the δ 2 -function in the in-
           teraction involves arbitrarily short wavelengths. In general, as usual, we
           must really be agnostic about the short-distance structure of things. To re-
           flect this, we introduce a regulator. For example, we can replace the fourier
           representation of Dk (0, 0) with the cutoff version
                                                   Z Λ
                                                             eiq·0
                                    Dk (0, 0; Λ) =     d̄2 q 2     .                   (1)
                                                    0       k + q2
            Do the integral.
        (e) Now we renormalize. We will let the bare coupling g (the one which appears
            in the Lagrangian, and in the series from part 2c) depend on the cutoff
            g = g(Λ). We wish to eliminate g(Λ) in our expressions in favor of some
            measurable quantity. To do this, we impose a renormalization condition:
            choose some reference scale µ, and demand that2
                                         !
                              Gµ (x, y) = Dµ (x, y) − g(µ)Dµ (x, 0)Dµ (0, y).                   (2)

            This equation defines g(µ), which we regard as a physical quantity. Show
            that (2) is satisfied if we let the bare coupling be g(Λ) = g(µ)Z, with
                                                          1
                                             Z=                         .
                                                  1 − g(µ)
                                                       4π
                                                           ln       Λ2
                                                                    µ2


        (f) Find the beta function for g,
                                                           dg(µ)
                                              βg (g) ≡ µ         ,
                                                            dµ
            and solve the resulting RG equation for g(µ) in terms of some initial condi-
            tion g(µ0 ). Does the coupling get weaker or stronger in the UV?

   3. Scale invariance in QFT in D = 0 + 0, part 1. [I got this problem from
      Frederik Denef.]
       A nice realization of QFT in 0 + 0 dimensions is the statistical mechanics of
       a collection of non-interacting particles. The canonical partition function for a
       single particle (moving in one dimension) is
                                     Z               √
                                Z = d̄P dXe−βH ∝ T ZV (T )                           (3)

   2
   Note that if we worked in real time, there would be an extra i in front of the second term on the
RHS.


                                                  2
             2
with H = P2 + V (X) and T = 1/β. The momentum integral is Gaussian and
we can just do it. The partition function of N non-interacting indistinguishable
particles is then Z N /N !, which just multiplies the energy U = T 2 ∂T log Z by a
factor of N , so we don’t miss anything by focussing on the single particle.
Let’s consider the case

                            V (X) = aX 2 + bX 4 + cX 6                           (4)

and figure out the important features of the temperature dependence of the ther-
modynamic quantities by scaling arguments.

(a) Assuming a 6= 0, b 6= 0, c 6= 0, find the behavior of the thermal energy U and
    the heat capacity C = ∂T U in the limit T → 0 and in the limit T → ∞ using
    scaling arguments. Which parts of the potential determine the respective
    limiting behaviors?
(b) If some of the couplings a, b, c vanish, the low or high temperature scal-
    ing behavior may change. For example, what is the heat capacity at low
    temperature when a = 0, b 6= 0?
 (c) When b is sufficiently large (and a 6= 0, c 6= 0), there will be an intermediate
     temperature regime over which the heat capacity is again constant, but
     different from the low- and high-temperature limits. What is this heat
     capacity?
(d) In general, we can think of the change of C with T as a kind of classical
    renormalization group (RG) flow, interpolating between ‘fixed points’ where
    C becomes constant. In general, these fixed points correspond to potentials
    V (X) with a scaling symmetry V (λ∆ X) = λV (X) for some choice of scaling
    dimension ∆ of X. What is the heat capacity for a fixed point with scaling
    dimension ∆ for X?
 (e) Borrowing more language of the renormalization group, we can classify
     deformations δV (X) = X m of a fixed point V (X) ∝ X 2n as irrelevant,
     marginal, or relevant, depending on whether the deformation becomes dom-
     inant or negligible in the IR limit, i.e. in the limit of low T . Here and below
      can take on any value, not necessarily small. Restricting to deformations
     with an X → −X symmetry, what are the relevant and irrelevant defor-
     mations of V (X) = X 2n ? (Note that a deformation δV = X 2n can be
     absorbed into a redefinition of X, which does not change the heat capacity.)
 (f) The T -dependence of correlation functions (here, expectation values of pow-
     ers of X) at fixed points is also determined by the scaling properties. What
     is the T -dependence of X k at a fixed point V (X) = X 2n ?

                                      3
(g) Non-polynomial V (X) can be considered as well. For example, what is the
    heat capacity at small and large T for V (X) = (1 + X 2 )1/n ?




                                  4
