University of California at San Diego – Department of Physics – Prof. John McGreevy
                Physics 215B QFT Winter 2025
                         Assignment 6
                                       Due 11:59pm Tuesday, February 18, 2025

                                                      µ
  1. Brain-warmer. Check that (∆T )µρ ≡ δρµ − q q2qρ is a projector onto momenta
     transverse to q ρ . This requires showing both that ∆q = 0 and that ∆2 = ∆.

  2. A better formula for the superficial degree of divergence. [Thanks to
     Haoran Sun for suggesting this formula.]
     Starting from the definition of an (amputated!) amplitude A from a connected
     Feynman diagram, show that its superficial degree of divergence is
                                     X              X
                         DA = D−        [g]Vg (A) −   Ef (A)[f ]              (1)
                                      {g}            {f }

     where {g} is the set of coupling constants and {f } is the set of fields, Vg (A) is
     the number of vertices of the coupling g in the diagram A, and Ef (A) is the
     number of external f fields. For example, for the Yukawa theory you studied on
     a previous homework, this formula reduces to

                          DA = D−[g]Vg −[y]Vy − BE [φ] − FE [φ]                      (2)

     where BE ≡ Eφ is the number of external scalars and FE ≡ Eψ is the number of
     external fermions in the diagram. If you prefer, for definiteness, you could just
     show the formula for this case.

  3. Symmetry is attractive. Consider a field theory in D = 3 + 1 with two scalar
     fields with the same mass which interact via the interaction
                                    g 4          2λ
                             V =−       φ1 + φ42 − φ21 φ22 .
                                    4!              4!
      (a) Show that when λ = g the model possesses an O(2) symmetry.
      (b) Will you need a counterterm of the form φ1 φ2 or φ1 φ2 (for general g, λ)?
          If not, why not?
      (c) Renormalize the theory to one loop order by regularizing (for example with a
          euclidean momentum cutoff or Pauli Villars), adding the necessary countert-
          erms, and imposing a renormalization condition on the propagators (con-
          sider the case where the scalars are both massless) and 2 → 2 scattering
          amplitudes at some values of the kinematical variables s0 , t0 , u0 . Feel free
          to re-use our results from φ4 theory where appropriate.

                                            1
        (d) Consider the limit of low energies, i.e. when s0 , t0 , u0  Λ2 where Λ is the
            cutoff scale. Tune the location of the poles in both propagators to p2 = 0.
            Show that the coupling goes to the O(2)-symmetric value if it starts nearby
            (nearby means λ/g < 3). (That is, show that at fixed physical coupling, the
            ratio of bare couplings λ/g → 1 as we take the cutoff to infinity.) A nice
            way to organize this is by computing the beta function for the coupling λ/g.

   4. Yes, please, gauge invariance. Verify for yourself that the one-loop vacuum
      polarization amplitude in QED (when computed using either the improved Pauli-
      Villars regulator or dim reg) satisfies the Ward identity, i.e. is proportional to
      q µ q ν − η µν q 2 . It’s up to you how much of this to hand in.

   5. Soft gravitons? [optional] Photons are massless, and this means that the cross
      sections we measure actually include soft ones that we don’t detect. If we don’t
      include them we get IR-divergent nonsense.
       Gravitons are also massless. Do we need to worry about them in the same way?
       Here we’ll sketch some hints for how to think about this question.

        (a) Consider the action
                                                        Z
                                                                1
                                          S0 [hµν ] =       d4 x hµν hµν .
                                                                2

             This is a kinetic term for (too many polarizations of a) two-index symmetric-
             tensor field hµν = hνµ (which we’ll think of as a small fluctuation of the
             metric about flat space: gµν ≃ ηµν +hµν , and this is where the coupling below
             comes from). Like with the photon, we’ll rely on the couplings to matter to
             keep unphysical polarizations from being made. Write the propagator for h.
             We still raise and lower indices with ηµν . 1
   1
     A warning: I’ve done two misdeeds in the statement of this problem. First, the Einstein-Hilbert
                  1 √                 1
term is d4 x 8πG       gR = d4 x 8πG      (∂h)2 + ... – it has a factor of GN in front of it. R has units
          R                  R
                   N                    N
      1                                                          2
of length2 , and g is dimensionless, so GN has units of length     – it is 8πGN = M12 , where MPl is the
                                           √                                         Pl
Planck mass. I’ve absorbed a factor of GN into h so that the coefficient of the kinetic term is unity.
Second, the (∂h)2 here involves various index contractions, which I haven’t written. Some gauge fixing
(de Donder gauge) is required to arrive at the simple expression I wrote above, and one more thing –
the hµν I’ve written is actually the ‘trace-reversed’ graviton field

                                                      1
                                          h̄µν ≡ hµν − hηµν
                                                      2
where h ≡ η µν hµν is the trace. (I didn’t write the bar.) For the details of this, which are not needed
for this problem, see chapter 10 of my GR notes.



                                                   2
   (b) Couple the graviton to the electron field via
                                       Z
                                SG =     d4 x Ghµν Tµν
                                  Tµν ≡ ψ̄ (γµ ∂ν + γν ∂µ ) ψ.                     (3)

        What are the engineering dimensions of the coupling constant G? What is
        the new Feynman rule?
    (c) Draw a (tree level) Feynman diagram that describes the creation of gravi-
        tational radiation from an electron as a result of its acceleration from the
        absorption of a photon (eγ → eh). Evaluate it if you dare. Estimate or
        calculate the cross section (hint: use dimensional analysis).
   (d) Now the main event: study the one-loop diagram by which the graviton
       corrects the QED vertex. Is it IR divergent? If not, why not?
    (e) If you get stuck on the previous part, replace the graviton field by a massless
        scalar π(x). Compare the case of derivative coupling λ∂µ π ψ̄γ µ ψ with the
        more direct Yukawa coupling yπ ψ̄ψ. [Warning: though this example has
        some similarities with the graviton case, the conclusion is different.]
    (f) Quite a bit about the form of the coupling of gravity to matter is deter-
        mined by the demand of coordinate invariance. This plays a role like gauge
        invariance in QED. Acting on the small fluctuation, the transformation is

                           hµν (x) → hµν (x) + ∂µ λν (x) + ∂ν λµ (x).

        What condition does the invariance under this (infinitesimal) transformation
        impose on the object Tµν appearing in (16).

6. Equivalent photon approximation. [optional] Consider a process in which
   very high-energy electrons scatter off a target. At leading order in α, the electron
   line is connected to the rest of the diagram by a single photon propagator. If
   the initial and final energies of the electron are E and E 0 , the photon will carry
   momentum q with q 2 = −2EE 0 (1−cos θ) (ignoring the electron mass m  E). In
   the limit of forward scattering (θ → 0), we have q 2 → 0, so the photon approaches
   its mass shell. In this problem, we ask: To what extent can we treat it as a real
   photon?

    (a) The matrix element for the scattering process can be written as

                                                      −iηµν ν
                             M = −ieū(p0 )γ µ u(p)        M̂ (q)
                                                       q2


                                         3
    where M̂ν represents the coupling of the virtual photon to the target. Let
    q = (q 0 , q~) and define q̃ = (q 0 , −~q). The contribution to the amplitude from
    the electron line can be parametrized as

                       ū(p0 )γ µ u(p) = Aq µ + B q̃ µ + Cµ1 + Dµ2

    where α are unit vectors transverse to q~. Show that B is at most of order
    θ2 (dot it with q), so we can ignore it at leading order in an expansion about
    forward scattering. Why do we not care about the coefficient A?
(b) Working in the frame with p = (E, 0, 0, E), compute

                                     ū(p0 )γ · α u(p)

    explicitly using massless electrons, where ū and u are spinors of definite
    helicity, and α=k,⊥ are unit vectors parallel and perpendicular to the plane
    of scattering. Keep only terms through order θ. Note that for k , the (small)
    3̂ component matters.
(c) Now write the expression for the electron scattering cross section, in terms
    of |M̂µ |2 and the integral over phase space of the target. This expression
    must be integrated over the final electron momentum p~0 . The integral over
      0
    p3 is an integral over the energy loss of the electron. Show that the integral
    over p0⊥ diverges logarithmically as p0⊥ or θ → 0.
(d) The divergence as θ → 0 is regulated by the electron mass (which we’ve
    ignored above). Show that reintroducing the electron mass in the expression

                           q 2 = −2(EE 0 − pp0 cos θ) + 2m2

    cuts off the divergence and gives a factor of log (s/m2 ) in its place.
(e) Assembling all the factors, and assuming that the target cross sections are in-
    dependent of photon polarization, show that the largest part of the electron-
    target cross section is given by considering the electron to be the source of
    a beam of real photons with energy distribution given by
                                     dx α                      s
                        Nγ (x)dx =         (1 + (1 − x)2 ) log 2
                                      x 2π                    m
    where x ≡ Eγ /E. This is the Weiszäcker-Williams equivalent photon ap-
    proximation. It is a precursor to the theory of jets and partons in QCD.




                                      4
