University of California at San Diego – Department of Physics – Prof. John McGreevy
                Physics 215B QFT Winter 2025
                         Assignment 7
                                      Due 11:59pm Tuesday, February 25, 2025


  1. Radiative corrections to Compton scattering. Check that our prescription
     for renormalizing QED through one loop (e.g. using Pauli-Villars with renor-
                                                                 e2    1
     malization conditions on the electron mass and the coupling 4π = 137 ) suffices
     to remove all the cutoff dependence in the S matrix for Compton (eγ → eγ)
     scattering through O(α2 ).
     [We mostly went over this in lecture, but I did say something slightly wrong at
     the time.]

  2. Yukawa couplings in QED. Consider adding to QED an additional scalar field
     of (physical) mass m, coupled to the electron by

                                       LY = λφψ̄ψ.

     Verify that the divergent contribution to the electron wavefunction renormaliza-
     tion factor Z2 from a virtual φ equals the divergent contribution to the QED
     vertex Z1 from the one loop correction to the vertex with a virtual φ. For an
     added challenge, verify that the finite parts agree as well.

  3. Spectral representation at finite temperature.
     In lecture we have derived a spectral representation for the two-point function of
     a scalar operator in the vacuum state

                               −iD(x) = h0| T O(x)O† (0) |0i

     Derive a spectral representation for the two-point function of a scalar operator
     in thermal equilibrium at a nonzero temperature T :

                         e−βH                1 X −βEn
           −iDβ (x) ≡ tr      T O(x)O† (0) =      e   hn| T O(x)O† (0) |ni .
                          Zβ                 Zβ n

     Here Zβ ≡ tre−βH is the thermal partition function. Check that the zero tem-
     perature (β → ∞) limit reproduces our previous result. Assume that O = O† if
     you wish.




                                          1
4. Another consequence of the optical theorem.
  A general statement of the optical theorem is:
                                        XZ
        −i (M(a → b) − M(b → a)) =             dΦf M? (b → f )M(a → f ) .
                                           f


  Consider QED with electrons and muons.

   (a) Consider scattering of an electron (e− ) and a positron (e+ ) into e− e+ (so
       a = b in the notation above). We wish to consider the contribution to the
       imaginary part of the amplitude for this process which is proportional to
       Q2e Q2µ where Qe and Qµ are the electric charges of the electron and muon
       (which are in fact numerically equal but never mind that). Draw the rele-
       vant Feynman diagram, and compute the imaginary part of this amplitude
       ImΠµ (q 2 ) (just the Q2e Q2µ bit) as a function of s ≡ (k1 + k2 )2 where k1,2
       are the momenta of the incoming e+ and e− . Feel free to re-use results of
       calculations from lecture.
       Check that the imaginary part is independent of the cutoff.
   (b) Use the optical theorem and the fact that the total cross section for e+ e− →
       µ+ µ− must be positive

                                  σ(e+ e− → µ+ µ− ) ≥ 0

       to show that a Feynman diagram with a fermion loop must come with a
       minus sign. Check that with the correct sign, the optical theorem is verified.




                                       2
