11 Relativistic Imperfect Fluids 53
11 Relativistic Imperfect Fluids*

The last section dealt with a perfect fluid, in which mean free paths and times
are so short that perfect isotropy is maintained about any point moving with the
fluid. In practice, one often has to deal with somewhat imperfect fluids, in which
the pressure, density, or velocity vary appreciably over distances of the order of a
mean free path, or over times of the order of a mean free time, or both. In such
fluids, thermal equilibrium is not strictly maintained, and the fluid kinetic energy
is dissipated as heat.

The correct treatment of dissipative effects for relativistic fluids raises certain
delicate questions of principle, which do not arise in the nonrelativistic case. For
this reason, and also because dissipation plays an increasingly important role in
theories of the early universe (see Sections 15.8, 15.10, 15.11), jt will be worth our
while here to develop the outlines of the general theory of relativistic imperfect

P g y Pp

We suppose that the presence of weak space-time gradients in an imperfect
fluid has the effect of modifying the energy-momentum tensor and particle current
vector by terms AT? and AN*, which are of first order in these gradients. Instead
of (2.10.7) and (2.10.13), we then have

T= py? + (p + p)UTU? + AT? (2.11.1)
N* = nU* + AN* (2.11.2)
Once we allow such correction terms, the definitions of the pressure p, energy
density p, particle density n, and fluid velocity U* become somewhat ambiguous.
The general practice is to define p and » as the total energy density and particle
number density in a comoving frame:
T° =p (2.11.3)
N° sn (2.11.4)
a comoving frame being characterized by the condition that i i
velocity four-vector is , at at @ given point, the
i “770
ves sl (2.11.5)
ie saeeion, the pressure p is generally defined to be the same function of pand n
x & ( a )] as in the case where all fluid gradients are negligible and dissipation
sent. Finally, it is necessary in a relativistic fluid to specify whether U* is th
velocity of energy transport . 1s the
Lifshitz,5 U* j port or particle transport. In the approach of Landau and
ine vonovin mI ‘aken fo be the velocity of energy transport, so that T° vanishes
€ trame. In the approach of Eckart,© U is taken to be the velocity of
* This section li ; oe
reading ton les somewhat out of the book’s main line of development, and may be omitted in a first ’
