Bibliography 63
pi-meson at 2, and then sees the pi-meson and some other neutron. turn into a
proton atx,, then the second observer must see the neutron at x, turn into a proton
and a particle of negative charge, which is then absorbed by a proton at x, that
turns into a neutron. Since mass is a Lorentz invariant, the mass of the negative
particle seen by the second observer will be equal to that of the positive pi-meson.
seen by the first observer. There is such a particle. called a negative pi-meson, and
it does indeed have the same mass as the positive pi-meson. This reasoning leads
us to the conclusion that for every type of charged particle there is an oppositely
charged particle of equal mass, called its antiparticle. Note that this conclusion
does not obtain in nonrelativistic quantum mechanics or in relativistic classical
mechanics; it is only in relativistic quantum mechanics that antiparticles are a
necessity.'> And it is the existence of antiparticles that leads to the characteristic
feature of relativistic quantwm dynamics, that given enough energy we can create
arbitrary numbers of particles and their antiparticles.
Special Relativity
For a more comprehensive treatment of special relativity, see any one of the
following books:
OJ. L. Anderson, Principles of Relativity Physics (Academic Press, New York,
1967), Chapters 6-9.
OC. Mgller, The Theory of Relativity (Oxford University Press, London, 1952),
Chapters I-VII.
0 1058) oped of Relativity, trans. by G. Field (Pergamon Press, Oxford,
> art lL,
OW. Rindler, Special Relativity (2nd ed., Oliver and Boyd, Edinburgh, 1966).
Q Heras Relativity: The Special Theory (Interscience Publishers, New York,
Relativistic Hydrodynamics
7 o en and E. M. Lifshitz, Fluid Af echanics, trans. by J. B. Sykes and
-H. Reid (Pergamon Press, London, 1959), Chapter XV.
Representations of the Lorentz Group
OG. Ya. Lyubarskii, The Anplicats
: ‘pplication of Group Theory in Physi
Press, Oxford, 1960), Chapters XV, XVI. ¥ ystes (Pergamon
