                                    14
          Bound States in External Fields



In our calculations of radiative corrections in Chapter 11 we went just
one step beyond the lowest order in pertur bation theory. However, there
is a very important class of problems where even the simplest calculation
requires that from the beginning we consider classes of Feyn nian diagrams
of arbitrarily high order in coupling constants like e . These problems are
those involving bound states - in electrodynamics, either ordinary atoms
and mo lecule s, or such exotic atoms as positronium or mu onium.
    It is easy to see that such problems necessaril y involve a breakdown
of ordinary pertur bation theory . Consider for in stance the amplitude for
electron-proton scattering as a function of the center-of-mass energy E .
A s shown in Section 10 .3, the existence of a bound state like the ground
state of hydrogen implies the ex istence of a pole in this amplitude at
E = m.~ + rn,-13. 6 eV. However , no single term in the perturbation series
for electron-proton scattering has such a pole. The pole therefore can only
arise from a di vergence of the sum over all diagrams at center-of-mass
energies near m.p + te e .
    The reason for this divergence of the perturbation series is also ea sy to
see, especially if for the moment we consider the time-ordered diagrams of
old-fa shioned perturbation theory instead of Feynman diagrams . Suppose
tha t in the center-of-mass s ystem the electron and proton both have
momenta of magnitude q < m e, and consider an intermediate state in
which the electron and proton moment a are different but also of order q .
The energy denominator factor contributed by this state will be of order
 [q~ 1mJ - ' . Each such state will also contribute a matrix element of the
Coulomb interaction of order e2l q2 the Fouri er transform of e 2 /r), and
the corresponding momentum space integration will contri bute a factor
of order q3 . Putting this together, we see that each additi onal Coulomb
interaction contri butes an overall factor ❑f orde r

                     [q~~m,.]-' [e'lq2l t q-'] = e'mel q
Thus the perturbat i on theory sh ould break down when q is less than or
of the order of e 2 m,, or in other words when the kinetic and potential

                                     564
