574                  14 Bound States in External Fields

been calculated, the amplitudes for scattering in an external field can be
calculated using ordinary Feynman diagrams, but with S,,~(x, Y) in place
of S {x - y} (and with .sit-dependent renormalization counterterms inserted
where appropriate) .
  Now let us see how to use the perturbation series with this corrected
propagator to calculate the shifts of bound-state energy levels. Consider
the full electron propagator S 'W( x, y}, involving interactions of the electron
with the quantum electromagnetic field as well as the external field :



with T(x) the electron field in a Heisenberg picture including all inter-
actions, and Q() the vacuum eigenstate of the full Hamiltonian . For a
time-independent external potential we can find a complete orthonormal
set ON of eigenstates of the full Hamiltonian with energies E . Inserting
a sum over these states in the operator product in Eq. (14 .2 .5), we find


                                                        N


                                                            N

where



                                                       Nr y
                                                      E'
                       (   N, ''( x s t)Q o) =_ e+~        NM           (14.x .$ )

(The sum includes an integral over continuum states as well as a sum over
discrete bound states. As before, UV and VNare non-zero only if the state
ON has charge -e or +e, respectively.) We can redefine the propagator as
a function of energy rather than tim e


                                   fco                      {

(Time-translation invariance dictates that S I(x, y) is a function of x0 - yo
but not of x° and y' separately .) From Eq. (14.2 .6) we see tha t

                            UjV W UN (Y)               VN W 11'N( r)
                                                                       (14.2.10 )
                            E ~; -E-a~                 E' +E-le

In particular, S,~(x, Y ; E) has a pole at any electron bound-state energy,
and also at the negative of any positron bound-state energy . Of course,
positrons do not have bound states in the coulomb field of an ordinary
positively charged nucleus .)
