                                 1 4 .1 e Dirac Equation                                      56 5

energies, which are of order q 11M. , are no larger than about m,, which,
of course, is of the order of the binding energy of hydrogen .
  Our problem here is to learn how to use perturbation theory to evaluate
radiative corrections in bound-state problems, summing to all orders those
diagrams that need to be summed to all orders, and keeping only a finite
number of those that don't ,



                             14.1 The Dirac Equation

We shall limit ourselves in this chapter to problems in which bound states
arise because of the Coulomb interaction of electrons (or muons) with
heavy charged particles such as atomic nuclei . As shown in Section 13 .6,
this interaction may be taken into account by adding to the interaction
Lagrangian a term' representing the effects of a c-number external vector
potential P(x) :

                                                            -- avtwyqllAv -- OwA O
                -iC(Z
                        2 - ~ ~~~ TY u XF i                                      (14.1 .1 )
which is obtained by replacing the quantum vector potential A` with
At + && in the interaction part of Eq. ( I 1,1 .6). For instance, for a single
heavy particle of charge Ze at the origin ,

                                                                                         (f4,1 .2)
                                         I I
It is the interaction ( 1 4.1 . 1 ) that must be taken into account to all orders .
In th is section we will cons ider the theory w ith only th is interaction,
leaving radiative corrections to subsequent sections.
   Physicists learn in kindergarten t o approach this sort of problem by
solving the wave equation of Dirac in the presence of the external field. It
might seem unnecessary to derive this equation here, but as emphasized
in Chapter 1, Dirac's original motivation for this equation as a sort of
relativist ic Schr6dinger equation does not stand up to inspection . Also, in
the course of our derivation we will d iscover the normalization conditions
that have to be imposed ❑ n the solut ions of the Dirac equation, whi ch
seemed somewhat ad hoc in Dirac' s approach . The solutions of the D irac
equati on discussed here will be important ingred ients in our treatment of
radiative correct ions in the next section .


' In this chapter we return to the use of an upper case T to denote the electron field in the
  Heisenberg picture, reserving a lower case W for the Dirac field with time-dependence governed
  solely by the c-num ber external field
