32.2 Massless Multiplets

393

Here N is the number of fundamental spinor representationsamong the
Qs for d odd and the number of fundamental spinor representations of
each chiralityamong the Qs for d = 0 (mod 8) and d = 4 (mod 8). For
d = 2 (mod 8) and d = 6 (mod 8) the numbers of fundamental spinor
and
representationsamong the Qs need not be the same for each chirality,
so these are denoted N+ and A/_.

32.2

Massless Multiplets

We will now consider how the supersymmetry algebras constructed in
the previous section may be used to construct supermultiplets of massless
operator
particlestatesin d > 4 spacetime dimensions. The momentum
P*1 commutes with all fermionic symmetry generators, so we can work
in the one-particlesubspace of Hilbert space where P*1 has a definite
lightlikeeigenvector p^9 which may be taken in a directionwith pl = p°
and all other spatial components of p^ zero. Just as in the case of
four spacetime dimensions, discussed in Section 2.5, these one-particle
states are classifiedaccording to the finite-dimensionalrepresentations
they provide of the little
group, the subgroup of the homogeneous Lorentz
that
leaves
little
invariant.The
p^
group contains combined boosts
group
along directions perpendicular to p and rotations in planes in which p
lies,such as the transformations (2.5.6)for four spacetime dimensions,
but these form an invariant Abelian subgroup and therefore in a finitedimensional representationmust be represented by the unit operator. With
thissubgroup omitted, the reduced little
group in d dimensions is 0(d — 2\
consisting of rotations in planes orthogonal to p. We therefore classify
massless particlestates according to the representationsthey provide of
0(d — 2) and of the automorphism groups described at the end of the
previous section.
These representationsare more complicated than those we have dealt
with in four spacetime dimensions, where the reduced little
group is 0(2)
and the representations are one-dimensional, characterized by a single
number, the helicity.Nevertheless it is useful to label the
of the reduced littlegroup 0(d — 2) with a 'spin,'defined as the
representations
maximum absolute value of the eigenvalue of any generator J,y in the
representation.
It is widely believed that there are no consistentquantum fieldtheories
involving massless particleswith spin greater than 2. It is known7 that
soft massless particleswith spin j > 1/2 can only interactwith conserved
currents carrying spin j. For j = 1 these are the currents of ordinary
conserved scalars,like electriccharge; for j = 3/2 they are the one or

