References

407

The differencebetween dimensionalitiesd = In and d = In + 1 is that
for d = In we have two fundamental spinor representationsin which the
•••
(—2an) of yin+\ isconstrained to be +1 or —1,
eigenvalue (—2a\)(—2gj)
=
while for d
2n + 1 there is one fundamental spinor representation with
no such limitationon the au.
It was the limitationof the eigenvalues of each fij to +1/2 that in
Section 32.1 identifiedthe fundamental spinor representationsas the only
possible representations of the Lorentz algebra that could be furnished
by fermionic symmetry generators. Indeed, from thiscondition we could
have inferredthat the 0(d) generators may be represented in a basis of
the form (32.A.8),with su = au + 1/2, and carried out the derivations of
this appendix in reverse order, using Eqs. (32.A.4)-(32.A.7)(along with
Eq. (32.A.17) for d odd) to express the Lorentz generators in terms of a
set of y^ satisfyingthe anticommutation relations(32.A.1).

Problems
1. Classify the massless particlemultiplets for each allowed kind of
supersymmetry in six spacetime dimensions, when allcentralcharges
vanish.
2. Suppose that itwere possible to have massless particlesfor allspins
up to j = 3, but no higher. Taking into account the fact that
massless particlesof spin 2 do exist,what isthe maximum
spacetime
dimensionality in which supersymmetry is possible? What is the
maximum
number of supersymmetry generators for each allowed
value of the spacetime dimensionality?
3. Consider types IIA and IIB supersymmetry in ten spacetime
dimensions.
Assume that only scalarcentralcharges appear in the extended
supersymmetry anticommutation relations.Find a lower bound on
particlemasses in terms of these central charges. Describe the 'BPS'
massive particlemultipletsallowed for particleswhose masses are at
thislower bound.
4. List the possible independent scalar and/or tensor central charges
for N = 1 supersymmetry in nine spacetime dimensions.

References
1. T Kaluza, Sitz.Preuss. Akad. Wiss. Kl, 966 (1921).
2. O. Klein, Z. Phys. 37, 895 (1926); Nature 118, 516 (1926).

