323 p-Branes

397

chiralitywith 8 components each; and the 0(9) three-form is decomposed
into a 0(8) three-form with 56 components and an 0(8) two-form with
28 components.
In the type IIB case of d = 10 with N+ = 2 and JV_ = 0 we must
group 0(8) and
classifystatesaccording to the representation of the little
a quantum number q that labelsthe representationsof the automorphism
group 0(2), under which the supersymmetry generators transform as a
2-vector. Since there is only one graviton, it must have q = 0. Acting
on these stateswith a supersymmetry generator gives two gravitinos with
q = +1 and 56 components each; acting with another supersymmetry
generator gives 2 two-form tensors with q = +2 and 28 components each;
acting with another supersymmetry generator gives 2 Weyl spinors with
q = +3 and 8 components each; and acting with another supersymmetry
generator gives 2 scalarswith q = +4 together with a self-dualfour-form
with q = 0 and 35 components.
In the heteroticcase of d = 10 with a single Weyl fermionic
generator
there are just Jf = 16 independent components. In this case there
is a graviton supermultiplet consisting of a graviton transforming under
0(8) as a symmetric tracelesstensor with 35 independent components;
a gravitino with 56 independent components; an 0(8) two-form with 28
independent components; a Weyl spinor with 8 components; and a scalar.
(This graviton supermultiplet isconstructed by acting with supersymmetry
generators on one state |2),six states |1),and one state |0),giving
8 x 24 = 128 = 35 + 56 + 28 + 8 +1 components.) Here we also have
altogether
the possibilityof gauge supermultiplets that contain no particleshaving
values greater than 1 or lessthan —1 for the eigenvalue of any Jy. These
gauge supermultiplets are formed by acting with supersymmetry
on a tate |1),and contain one gauge particlebelonging to the vector
generators
representationof 0(8), with 8 components, and one particletransforming
as a fundamental Weyl spinor of 0(8), also with 8 components.

32.3

p-Branes

In some theoriesin addition to particlesthere are stableextended objects,
eitherof infinite xtent or stabilizedby 'wrapping' around a topologically
non-trivialspacetime. The study of supersymmetry and supergravity in
higher-dimensional theoriesof thissort has opened up remarkable
opportunities
for the construction of string theories and supersymmetric field
theoriesin lower-dimensional spacetime and for the proof of equivalencies
among these theories,48which are beyond the scope of thisbook. The
feature
of these extended objects that concerns us here isthat they can carry
conserved bosonic quantitiesother than those allowed by the Coleman-

