             31.7 Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking             355

where h((j))
           isan arbitraryfunction of (j).
                                        But there is no known    principle
that would require 3f to take thisform.



         31.7   Gravity-Mediated    Supersymmetry     Breaking

We now take up again the problem of supersymmetry breaking. As
discussed at the beginning of Chapter 28, ifsupersymmetry isto be of use
in solving the hierarchy problem — that is,in understanding the large ratio
of the Planck mass mpi = 1/^SnG to the mass scaleof observed particles
— then
         supersymmetry must be unbroken at the Planck scale,and broken
spontaneously only at some much lower mass scale.The only plausible
mechanism known that would naturally produce a very large ratio of
mass scales is the non-perturbative effectof asymptotically free gauge
interactions.If these interactionsare moderately weak at the Planck scale
then their slow growth with decreasing energy will make them become
strong at a much lower scale A < mpi. The known elementary particles
do not feelsuch strong forces,so whatever supersymmetry breakdown is
produced directlyor indirectlyby these strong gauge interactionsmust
be communicated to the observed particlesby some interactionin which
they do participate.
   In Section 28.3 we noted two possible mechanisms for communicating
the breakdown of supersymmetry to observable particles.    One mechanism,
gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking, was discussed in detailin
     28.6.We are now ready to consider the other mechanism, mediation
Section
of supersymmetry breaking by effectsof gravitationalstrength.
   In the early 1980s, when gravitationwas firstconsidered as the mediator
of supersymmetry breaking,14 it was generally assumed that the super-
potential consisted of two terms: a function /(O) of various left-chiral
superfieldsOr of an observable sector,including allthe superfieldsof
observableparticles,plus a function /(Z) of various left-chiral
                                                              superfieldsZ&
of a hidden sector,15allof which are neutral under the SU(3)xSU(2)xU(l)
gauge group of the standard model. Further, the superpotential of the
hidden sectorwas assumed to take the form

                            7(Z) = 63F(fcZ),                      (31.7.1)
where e is some mass that is much lessthan the Planck mass, and F(kZ)
is a power seriesin kZ with coefficientsof order unity. The assumption
that the total superpotential should be a sum /(O) + /(Z) is somewhat
arbitrary but, as we shall see, it is not difficult o think of reasons why
this should be at least approximately true. A more serious criticismof
this approach is that it did not offer any hope of solving the hierarchy
