                     The Cluster
                Decomposition Principle


Up to this point we have not had much to say about the detailed structure
of the Hamiltonian ❑perator H . This operator can be defined by giving
all its matrix elements between states with arbitrary numbers of particles .
Equivalently, as we shall show hers, any such operator may be expressed
as a function of certain operators that create and destroy single particles .
We saw in Chapter 1 that such creation and annihilation operators were
first encountered in the canonical quantization of the electromagnetic field
and other fields in the early days of quantum mechanics . They provided
a natural formalism for theories in which massive particles as well as
photons can be produced and destroyed, beginning in the early 1930s with
Fermi's theory of beta decay.
   However, there is a deeper reason for constructing the Hamiltonian out
of creation and annihilation operators, which goes beyond the need to
quantize any pre-existing field theory like electrodynamics, and has nothing
to do with whether particles can actually be produced or destroyed . The
great advantage of this formalism is that if we express the Hamiltonian
as a sum of products of creation and annihilation operators, with suitable
non-singular coefficients, then the S-matrix will automatically satisfy a
crucial physical requirement, the cluster decomposition principle,l which
says in effect that distant experiments yield uncorrelated results . Indeed, it
is for this reason that the formalism of creation and annihilation operators
is widely used in non-relativistic quantum statistical mechanics, where the
number of particles is typically fixed . In relativistic quantum theories, the
cluster decomposition principle plays a crucial part in making field theory
inevitable . There have been many attempts to formulate a relativistically
invariant theory that would not be a local field theory, and it is indeed
possible to construct theories that are not field theories and yet yield
a Lorentz-invariant S-matrix for two-particle scattering,2 but such efforts
have always run into trouble in sectors with more than two particles : either
the three-particle S-matrix is not Lorentz-invariant, or else it violates the
cluster decomposition principle .
  In this chapter we will first discuss the basis of states containing ar-

                                     1 69
1 70                 4 The C lu ste r Decomposition Principl e

bitrary numbers of bosons and ferrnians, then define the creation and
annihilation operators, and finally show how their use facilitates the
construction of Hamiltonians that yield 5-matrices satisfying the cluster
decomposition condition .


                          4. 1 Bosons and Fermions

The H ilbert space of physical states is spanned by states conta ining 0,
1, 2, - - - free particles . These can be free-particle states, or `in' s t ates, or
out' states ; for definiteness we shall deal here with the free-particle states
 Fi f7i n] M2 C72n_,- .# but all our results will apply equally to `in' or `out' states .
As usual, a labels spin z-components (or helicities, for massless particles)
and n labels particle species .
   We must now go into a matter that has been passed over in chapter 3 ;
the symmetry properties of these states. As far as we know, all particles
are either bosons or .fermions, the difference being that a state is unchanged
by the interchange of two identical bosons, and changes sign under the
interchange of two identical fermions . That is


with an upper or lower sign if n is a boson or a fermion, respectively,
and dots representing other particles that may be present in the state .
(Equivalently, this could be stated as a condition on the `wave functions,'
the coefficients of these multi-particle basis vectors in physically allowable
state-vectors.) These two cases are often referred to as Bose or Fermi
`statistics' . We will see in the next chapter that Bose and Fermi statistics
are only possible for particles that have integer or half-integer spins, re-
spectively, but we shall not need this information in the present chapter . In
this section we shall offer a non-rigorous argument that all particles must
be either bosons or fermions, and then set up normalization conditions
for multi-boson or multi-fermion states .
    First note that if two particles with spins and momenta p, u and p%cr'
belong to identical species n, then the state-vectors (D .,, p , .. . pf ufn . . . and
0. .. p+ c{ n ... p cr n .. represent the same physical Mate ; if this were not the case
then the particles would be distinguished by their order in the labelling
of the state-vector, and the first listed would not be identical with the
second. Since the two state-vectors are physically indistinguishable, they
must belong to the same ray, and s o


where i,, is a complex number of unit absolute value . We may regard this
as part of the definition of what we mean by identical particles .
                          4.1 Bosons and Fermions                                17 1

  The crux of the matter is to decide on what the phase factor a, may
depend. If` it depends on ly on the species index n, t hen we are nearly done.
Interchanging the two particles in Eq. (4. 1.2) aga i n , we find
                    4).                       z     ., . Pd rr , . . p, 17 , n
                              p'rr'n - . .   an ~

 so that a~ = 1, yielding Eq . (4 .1 .1) as the only two possibilities .
   On what else could a, depend? It might depend on the numbers
 and species of the other particles in the state (indicated by dots in
 Eqs. (4 .1 .1) and (4 .1 .2}), but this would lead to the uncomfortable result
 that the symmetry of state-vectors under interchange of particles here on
earth may depend on the presence of particles elsewhere in the universe .
This is the sort of thing that is ruled ❑ ut by the cluster decomposition
principle, to be discussed later in this chapter . The phase x, cannot
have any non-trivial dependence on the spins of the two particles that
are interchanged, because then these spin-dependent phase factors would
have to furnish a representation of the rotation group, and there are
no non-trivial representations of the three-dimensional rotation group
that are one-dimensional - that is, by phase factors . The phase g,,
might conceivably depend on the momenta of the two particles that are
interchanged, but Lorentz invariance would require o~n to depend only on
the scalar p 2p ; this is symmetric under interchange of particles I and 2,
and therefore such dependence would not change the argument leading
to the conclusion that a~ = 1 ,
   The logical gap in the above argument is that (although our notation
hides the fact) the states (Dpi cT, n,pz t7zn,--- may carry a phase factor that
depends on the path through momentum space by which the momenta
of the particles are brought to the values p i, p2, etc . In this case the
interchange of two particles twice might change the state by a phase
factor, so that ocn 1 . We will see in Section 9.7 that this is a real
possibility in two-dimensional space, but not for three or more spatial
dimensions .
   What about interchanges of particles belonging to different species? If
we like, we can avoid this question by simply agreeing from the beginning
to label the state-vector by listing all photon momenta and helicities first,
then all electron momenta and spin z-components, and so on through the
table of elementary particle types . Alternatively, we can allow the particle
labels to appear in any order, and define the state-vectors with particle
labels in an arbitrary order as equal to the state-vector with particle
labels in some standard order times phase factors, whose dependence
on the interchange of particles of different species can be anything we
like . In order to deal with symmetries like isospin invariance that relate
particl es of different species, it is convenient to adopt a convention that
generalizes Eq. (4.1 .1) : the state-vector will be taken to be symmetric
172 4 The Cluster Decomposition Principl e

under interchange ❑ f any bosons with each other, or any bosons with
any fermions, and antisymmetric with respect to interchange of any two
fermions with each other, in all cases, whether the particles are of the
same species or na# .'
   The normalization of these states must be defined in consistency with
these symmetry conditions. To save writing, we will use a label q to
denote all the quantum numbers of a single particle : its momentum, p,
spin z-component (or, for massless particles, helicity) (r, and species n . The
N-particle states are thus labelled (Dqi . , . q N (with N = 0 for the vacuum
state (Do . ) For N = 0 and   = 1 the question of symmetry does not arise :
here we have
                                         (0n, (D o) = 1                                     (4.1 .3)
and


where 6 (q'-q ) is a product of all the delta functions and Kronecker deltas
for the particle's quantum numbers ,
                             6 (q ' - q) = P( P f - p) 5,f~bWn .                            (4.1 .5)
O n the other hand, for = 2 the states ~ qlq~ and ~ 'q ~ are physically the
same, so here we must take

   (q;q 2' 7 (Dqlq2     _ 6(- cat ) 6( Ri - q2) ± 6( R2 - 4i ) b( ~'i - 42 ) (4 .1 .6)
                         4i
the sign ± being - if both particles are fermions and + otherwise . This
obviously is consistent with the above stated symmetry properties of the
states . More generally,



The sum here is over all permutations ~)" of the integers 1, 2, . . . , N. (For
instance, in the first term in E q . (4.1 .6), ' is the identity, Y1 = 1 , Y2 = 2,
while in the second term Y 1 = 2, Y2 = 1 . ) Also, bg is a sign factor equal
to -1 if 9/ involves an odd permutation of fermions (an odd number of
fermion interchanges) and +1 otherwise. It is easy to see that Eq. (4.1 .7)
has the desired symmetry or antisymmetry properties under interchange
of the qj, and also under interchange of the q j.


  In fact, by the same reasoning, the symmetry or antisyrnrnetry of the state-vector under inter-
  change of particles of the same species but different heliczkies or spin a-components is purely
  conventional, because we could have agreed from the beginning to list first the momenta of
  photons of helicity +1, then the momenta of all photons of helicity - 1, then the momenta of
  all electrons of spin z-component + ~, and so on . We adopt the cr~nuentfnM that the state-vector
  is symmetric or antisymmetric under interchange of identical bosons or fermians of diftrent
  bell-cities or spin z-components in order to facilitate the use of rotational invariance .
                     4.2 Creation and Annihilation Operators                                                   17 3

                 4 .2 Creation and Annihilation Operators

Creation and annihilation operators may be defined in terms of their effect
on the normalized multi-particle states discussed in the previous section .
The creation operator at(q) (or in more detail, at(p, a , n)] is defined as the
operator that simply adds a particle with quantum numbers q at the front
of the list of particles in the stat e

                             a t ( 4)(Dq,q z ... q. - q)q q jq2 . .. qN .             (4.2.1 )
In particular, the N-particle state can be obtained b y acting on the vacuum
with N creation operators



It is conventional for this operator to b e called at (q) ; its adjoint, which
is then called a(q), may be calculated from Eq . (4.1 .7) . As we shall
now show, ❑ (4) removes a particle from and state on which it acts, and
is therefore known as an annihilation operator . In particular, when the
particles q q l , . . qN are either all bosons or all fermions, we hav e



                                   r=1

w ith a +1 or -1 sign for bosons or fe rmivns, respectively . (Here is the
proof. We want to calculate the scalar product of a ( q ) (Dqjq2 .. .q N with an
arbitrary state qi .. . q~ . Using Eq. (4.2 .1), this is



We now use Eq. (4.1 .7) . The sum over permutations 01 of 1,2, . . .,N
can be written as a sum over the integer r that is permuted into the
first place, i .e . gr = 1, and over mappings ]' of the remaining integers
1, . . . , r - 1, r + 1, . . • , N into 1, • - - , N -- 1 . Furthermore, the sign factor i s



with upper and lower signs for bosons and fermions, respectively . Hence,
using Eq . (4.1 .7) twice,



                                         N                M
                                  x


                                                N
                               _ 6 jV, M + 1                       1, . . ql  0q l"' . 9r - 1 qj,+ 1 ., . qN
                                                               q           M?
                                               r= 1
174                     4 The Cl u s ter Decomposition Principl e

Both sides of Eq. (4.2.3) thus have the same matrix element with any state
1D,7F, ..q~, and are therefore equal, as was to be shown . As a special case
of ~Ec~. (4.2 .3), we note that for both bosons and fermions, a(q) annihilates
the vacuum
                                           a (q ) (Do = 0 .                                                      (4 .2 .4 )
  As defined here, the creation and annihilation operators satisfy an im-
portant commutation or anticommutation relation . Applying the operator
a(q') to Eq- (4 .2-1) and using Eq. (4.2.3) give s


                                              'IV

                                                    ti              - qr~ (DqtIl . . , q r-I qr-1 , . .t1.ti `
                                           r =1

(The sign in the second term is (±),,+2 because cox is in the (r + 1)-th place
in (N . j ,., q .k - ) On the other hand, applying the operator at(q) to Eq . (4.2.3)
gives
                                          N
          a'( R) a(q r) (1)q, . . .q N
                                         r= l

Subtracting or adding, we have the n

              [a(q')a*(q) :~ a1(q)a(q')1                 (Vqj-qjv      6(q' - q)(Dql . . . qN '
But this holds for all state s cDq , . ., .,,; (and may ea sily be seen to hold also
for states containing both bosons and fermions) and therefore i mplies the
operator relation
                                                                                                                 (42s)
In addition, Eq. (4.2.2) gives immediatel y
                                                                                                                 (4.2 .6 )
and so also
                                                                                                                 (4 . 2 . 7 )
As always, the top and bottom signs apply for bosons and fermions,
respectively . According to the conventions discussed in the previous
section, the creation and/or annihilation operators for particles of two
different species commute if either particle is a boson, and anticomrnute
if both are fermions .
   The above discussion could have been presented in reverse order (and
in most textbooks usually is) . That is, we could have started with the
commutation or anticomrnutation relations Eqs . (4.2.5)-(427), derived
from the canonical quantization of some given field theory . Multi-particle
                 4.2 Creation and Annihilation Operators                   175

states would have then been defined by Eq. (4.2 .2), and their scalar
products Eq . (4.1 .7) derived from the commutation or anticammutation
relations . In fact, as discussed in Chapter 1, such a treatment would be
much closer to the way that this formalism developed historically . We
have followed an unhistorical approach here because we want to free
ourselves from any dependence on pre-existing field theories, and rather
wish to understand why field theories are the way they are .
   We will now prove the fundamental theorem quoted at the beginning
of this chapter : any operator 6' may be expressed as a sum of products of
creation and annihilation operator s



                         N= O ?4t =o

                         x CNkr (q i . . . q ~v R j . . . q ±tir)      ( 4 .2.8)
That is, we want to show that the C'NAf coefficients can be chosen to give
the matrix elements of this expression any desired values . We do this by
mathematical induction . First, it is trivial that by choosing Coo properly,
we can give ((Do, 60p) any desired value, irrespective of the values of C N ,u
with N > 0 and/or M > 0 . We need only use Eq. {4_2.4} to see that
Eq. (4 .2 .8) has the vacuum expectation valu e



Now suppose that the same is true for all matrix elements of 6 between
N- and M-particle states, with N         L,      :!~ K or N ~ L, M K ; that
is, that these matrix elements have been given some desired values by
an appropriate choice of the corresponding coefficients Cvm . To see that
the same is then also true of matrix elements of G between any L- and
K-particle states, use Eq. (4.2 .8) to evaluat e



     + terms involving C NM with N < L, Nl S K or N < L, A4           K

Whatever values have already been given to C NM with N < L, M K
or N < L, Al      K, there is clearly some choice of CLK which gives this
matrix element any desired value.
   Of course, an operator need not be expressed in the form (4.2.8), with
all creation operators to the left of all annihilation operators . (This
is often called the 'normal' order of the operators .) However, if the
formula for some operator has the creation and annihilation operators
in some other order, we can always bring the creation operators to the
left of the annihilation operators by repeated use of the commutation or
1 76                           4 The Cluster Decomposition Principl e

anticommutation relations, picking up new terms from the delta function
in E q. (4 .2.5) .
   For instance, consider any sort of additive operator F (like momentum,
charge, etc .) for whic h
                             F (D ql .. . q1V _ (f ( 4 i) + . . . + f (q nr ) ) (Dq , . . . qN .        (4. 2.9)
Such an operator can be written as in Eq. (4 .2 .8), but using only the term
with N = M - 1 :

                                                                                                                   (4. 2. 10)

In particular, the free-particle Hamiltonian is alway s

                                            Ho == f dq a~(q)a(q)E(q )                                              (4.2.21 )

where E(q) is the single-particle energy



   We will need the transformation properties of the creation and annihila-
tion operators for various symmetries, First, let's consider inhamogeneous
proper orthochronous Lorentz transformations . Recall that the N-particle
states have the Lorentz transformation property
       UO(A, a)(DP I 01 1 n 1 , P 2 (72 n 2, - .


                                                                 PPIP2

                                                   x                   L
                                                                           6 0- , (W(Ap)D/
                                                                           II                .(    FF   (   LL   p,))
                                                             y . . .
                                                       al   Qt



                                           . . . F1 .4IT 1 n ] , p2nQ 2 n2 ,

Here PA is the three-vector part of lip, D~j~(R) is the same unitary spin-j
representation of the three-dimensional rotation group as used in Section
2.5, and W(A,p) is the particular rotatio n


where L(p) is the standard `boot' that takes a particle of mass m from rest
to four-momentum p" . (Of curse, m and j depend on the species label n.
This is all for m    0 ; we will return to the massless particle case in the
following chapter.) Now, these states can be expressed as in Eq . (4 .12 )


where (DD is the Lorentz-invariant vacuum state
              4.3 C lu ster Decomposition and Connected Amplitudes 17 7

In order that the state (4.2.2) should transform properly, it is necessary
and sufficient that the creation operator have the transformation rul e

      Up ( l~, a)al(p ff n) U6-1 (A, OL ) = 8 r ( Ap ) •x ~(Ap)G/p l
                                                 x         Da (W {A + P )) al ( PA Cr ( 4.2.1 2 )

In the same way, the operators C, P, and T, that induce charge-conjugation,
space inversion, and txxne-reversal transformations on free particle states'
transform the creation operators as :



                                Pu t( p o- n)P Ti = i}, at(--- p a n) ,                 (4.2.14)

                        Tal ( P a n)T-1 = ~, ( - I )j -d al (-p - a n ) ,                            (4.2.15)

   As mentioned in the previous section, although we have been dealing
with operators that create and annihilate particles in free-particle states,
the whole formalism can be applied to `gin' and 'out' states, in which case
we would introduce operators aM and a,,ut defined in the same way b y
their action on these states . These operators satisfy a Lorentz transforma-
tion rule just like Eq . (4.2.12), but with the true Lorentz transformation
operator U(A, oc) instead of the free-particle operator Uo( 11, a ).



        4.3 Cluster Decomposition and Connected Amplitude s

It is one of the fundamental principles of physics (indeed, of all science)
that experiments that are sufficiently separated in space have unrelated
results. The probabilities for various collisions measured at Fermilab
should not depend on what sort of experiments are being done at CERN
at the same time, I f this principle were not valid, then we could never
make any predictions about any experiment without knowing everything
about the universe.
   In S-matrix theory, the cluster decomposition principle states that if
multi-particle processes al ` #I , ac2 ` fl2s . . . a aAf --* fl ..y are studied in K
very distant laboratories, then the S-matrix element for the overall proces s


 We omit the subscri pt '0' on t h ese operators, becau se in v i rtuall y a ll cases wher e C, P , and/or
 T a r e conserved, the operators tha t ind uce t hese transformations o n 'in' a n d 'out' states are the
 same as th ose dofined by t he ir actio n on free- p artic l e states. This is not the case for cont i nu ous
 Lorentz transformations, for w hic h it is nec e ssary to disti n guish between t h e operators U(A,a)
 and U60, a) .
 178                       4 The Cluster Decomposition Principle

factorizes. That i s, *




if for all i ~ j, all ❑f the particles in states ocj and /i i are at a great spatial
distance from all of the particles in states uj and flj . This factorization of S-
matrix elements will ensure a factorization of the corresponding transition
probabilities, corresponding to uncorrelated experimental results .
  There is a combinatoric trick that allows us to rewrite Eq . (4.3.1) in
a more transparent way. Suppose we define the connected part of the
S-matrix, Sc, by the formula"

                                  sflit                    SC SC                                         (4.3 .2)
                                                             fil-Itl V7 2
                                            PART


Here the sum is over all different ways of partitioning the particles in
the state ac into clusters Xi, oc2, - . ., and likewise a sum over all ways of
partitioning the particles in the state fl into clusters fi 1, fl2, , not counting
as different those that merely arrange particles within a given cluster
or permute whole clusters . The sign is + or - according to whether
the rearrangements a -r xj,)c2 . . . and # -} fl 1 02 . . . involve altogether
an even or an odd number of fermion interchanges, respectively . The
term `connected' is used because of the interpretation of S(' in terms of
diagrams representing different contributions in perturbation theory, to
b e discussed in the next section .
  This is a recursive definition . For each i and 11, the sum on the right-
hand side of Eq . (4.3 .2) consists of a term 5~, plus a sum I' over products
of two or more SI-matrix elements, with a total number of particles in
each of the states aj and #j that is less than the number of particles in



 ' We are here returning to the notation used in Chapter 3 ; Greek letters a or {3 stand for a
   collection of particles, including for each particle a specification of its momentum, spin, and
   species . AIR). x , + a -) + - • • + cc .,4- is the state formed by combining all the particles in the states
   . x l , a2, . . ,and x .t. ,and likewise for fli + f32 + . . . + fl .y .
" This decomposition has been used in classical statistical mechanics by Ur5e11, Mayer, and others,
   and in quantum statistical mechanics by Lee and Yang and others .3 It has also been used
   to calculate many-body ground state energies b y Goldstone 4 and Hugenholta . 5 In all of' these
   applications the purpose ofisolating the connected parts of Green's functions, partition functions,
   resolvents, etc,, is to deal with objects with a simple volume dependence . This is essentially our
   purpose ton, because as we shall see, the crucial property of the connected parts ofthe S-matrix
   is that they are proportional to a single momentum-conservation delta function, and in a box the
   delta function becomes a Kronecker delta times the volurnc . The cluster decomposition is also
   the same formal device as that used in the theory of naise 6 to decompose the correlation function
   of several random variables into its 'cumulants' ; if' the random variable receives contributions
   from a large number N of independent fluctuations, then each cumulant is proportional to N,
              4.3 Cluster Decomposition and Connected Amplitude s                                         1 79

the states a and #


                                                         PART

Suppose that the S`-matrix elements in this sum have already been chosen
in such a way that Eq . (43 .2) is satisfied for states fl, ~c containing together
fewer than, say, N particles . Then no matter what values are found in this
way for the 5-matrix elements appearing in the sum E', we can always
choose the remaining term 5C so that Eq. (4.3 .2) is also satisfied for
states a, fl containing a total of N particles. Thus Eq . (4.3 .2) contains no
information in itself ; it is merely a definition of SC .
   If the states x and li each consist of just a single particle, say with
quantum numbers q and q ' respectively, then the only term on the right-
hand-side of Eq. (4.3 .2) is just S~' itself, so for one-particle state s
                                                 c

(Apart from possible degeneracies, the fact that S. r q is proportional to
 (q' - q) follows from conservation laws . The absence of any proportion-
ality factor in Eq . (4.3 .3) is based on a suitable choice of the relative phase
of `in' and `nut' states .) We are here assuming that single-particle states
are stable, so that there are no transitions between single-particle states
and any others, such as the vacuum .
   For transitions between two-particle states, Ey . (4.3.2) reads

 S11~q 7,~~~~z - ~~;~~,~~~~ + 6(q i - ~I1 ) 6(q ~ -- c~ ?               ± b ( ~fi - R? )6(q2- q 1 ) . (4.3.4)

(We are here using Eq . (4.3.3).) The sign ± is - if both particles are
fermions, and otherwise + . We recognize that the two delta function
terms just add up to the norm (4 .1 .6), so here Spa is just (S - I)#,, . But the
general case is more complicated .
   For transitions between three-particle or four-particle states, Eq . (4.3 .2)
reads
                  ~+
                 `1 q', q
                                                     c
                            ~ q ~~ q i t~2 q t   ~q, q~ R3•q 1 q 2 q3

                 +5(q i - q l)S~z q ~.qz q3 + permutation s
                 +b ( qi - gl)cS(q~ - q 2 )6(q~ -- q3) ± permutations                                (4.3 .5 )


~ A technicality should be mentioned here . This argument works only if we neglect the possibility
  that for one or more of the connected S-matrix elements in E q_ (4,3.2), the states x1 and ti~ both
  contain no particles a I a 11 . We mist therefore de#2ne the cnlincued vacuum-vacuum element Soo
  to he zero. We do not use Eq . {4 3 .2} for the vacuum vacuum S-matrix So .o, which in the absence
  of time-varying external fields is simply defined to be unity, 5 O,() = t . We will have more to say
  about the vacuum vacuum amplitude in the presence of external fields in Volume II .
180                     4 The Cluster Decomposition Principl e

and

                                  Sc
      S~Ii~~q'q~,Riqaq3Ra RtqzR34~ , 4i4z934 a

      + Sc q',4~R2S~   q4              +      permutations
            1 2 3R,R34

      + 6 (qi - q l )S~ ~3~~,~~~~~a ± permutation s

      + 6(q i - q 1) 6( ~`2 - 42 ) S3~~,q3 q4 + permutations
      + 6 (qt - q l)6 (q2 --~- q2) 6 (q~ - q 3)6( q~ - q4) ± permutations . (4.3.6)

(Taking account of all permutations, there are a total of 1 + 9 + 6 = 1 6
terms in Eq . (4 .3 .5) and 1 + 18 + 1 6 + 72 + 24 = 131 terms in Eq . (4.3.6).
If we had not assumed that one-particle states are stable, there would
be even more terms .) As explained previously, the definition of S~'
recursive : we use Eq . (4.3 .4) to define SC for two-particle states, then use
this definition in Eq . (4.3 .5) when we define S~,! for three-particle states,
then use both of these definitions in Eq. (4 .3.6) to obtain the definition of
,5~ for four-particle states, and so on .
  The point of this definition of the connected part of the S-matrix is
that the cluster decomposition principle is equivalent to the requirement
that S~ must vanish when any one or more of the particles in the states ~
and/or cc are far away in space from the others.t To see this, suppose that
the particles in the states P and a are grouped into clusters fil , P2, - { • and
11, act, ` ' ' ,and that all particles in the set a ; + flz are far from all particles
in the set act + Pj for any j        i . Then if 5pc.y vanishes if any particles in
X or ac' are far from the others, it vanishes if any particles in these states
are in different clusters, so the definition (4 .3 .2) yields

        ___ ( ) (      )S                           . . . X 1: (2) (     )           S              X   . . .~
                                                                                                                 (4.3.7)
 ~Ply            1 ±        # i i a ii ~9 iy X ix                      + S 21 a 21       0 22 222


where 1W is a sum over all different ways of partitioning the clusters X31
and a j into su bclusters Pj i, flj2 , . . . and acj l, ccj 2, . ., But referring back to
Eq. (4.3.2), this is just the desired factorization property (4 .3.1).
  For instance, suppose that in the four-particle reaction 1234 --+ 1'2`3'4',
we let particles 1, 2, 1', and 2' be very far from 3,4J, and 4' . Then if
SC vanishes when and particles an # and/or a are far from the others,
the only terms in Eq . (4.3 .6) that survive (in an even more abbreviated
notation) are



  I n order to give a meaning to 'far, we wil l have to Fou rier tran sfor m SC, so th at each t hre e-
  mo m entum l abe l p i s repl aced with a spatia l coordinate th ree-vector x.
             4.3 Cluster Decomposition and Connected Amplitudes                                     18 1

       S 1 '2'3' 4', 1 234 ~ SIC'21,12S3C1 4 ',3 4

                                    + (61' l 62f 2       ± 6 1'2 6 Z' 0"J 4',34

                                    + (436q4 ± 63 '4 43)S1'2',12

                                                              61'A'1)(63'3&4'4 ± 63'443 )

Comparison with Eq. (4 .3.4) shows that this is just the required factvriza-
tion condition (4.3 . 1)

                                   S1'2' 3 r 4' ,1234 --* S 1 ' 2',12 S3 '4', 3 4

  We have formulated the cluster decomposition principle in coordinate
spare, as the condition that SC vanishes if any particles in the states fl
or a are far from any others. It is convenient for us to reexpress this in
momentum space. The coordinate space matrix elements are defined as a
Fourier transform
             S
                  x~ ...,~ J x2 ., . = Jd3p'td3p 2 . . . d ~ p 1 d 3 p2 . . . SFIp 2 ... PiPz, ..


(We are here temporarily dropping spin and species labels, which just
go along with the momentum or coordinate labels .) If I SC           ~ were
                                                            PP a .,.
                                                         P 1 '2'_'P1
sufficiently well behaved (to be specific, if it were Lebesgue integrable) then
according to the Riemann-Lebesgue theorem7 the integral (4.3 .8) would
vanish when any combination of spatial coordinates goes to infinity . Now,
this is certainly too strong a requirement . Translational invariance tells
us that the connected part of the S-matrix, like the S-matrix itself, can
only depend on differences of coordinate vectors, and therefore does not
change at all if all of the xi and x') vary together, with their differences
held constant . This requires that the elements of S' in a momentum
basis must, like those o f S , be proportional to a three-dimensional delta
function that ensures momentum conservation (and makes ISp P' . .•p
                                                                           lP2' .'~
got Lebesgue integrable), as well as the energy-conservation delta function
required by scattering theory . That is, we can writ e




This is no problem : the cluster decomposition principle only requires that
Eq . (4.3.8) vanish when the differences among some of the xi and/or x4
become large . However, if C itself in Eq . (4.3.9) contained additional delta
functions of linear combinations of the three-momenta, then this principle
would not be satisfied . For instance, suppose that there were a delta func-
tion in C that required that the sum ❑f the g ~ and - pj for some subset of
the particles vanished . Then Eq . (4.3 .8) would not vary if all of the x' and
182 4 The Clu ster Decomposition Principl e

x1 for the particles in that subset moved together (with constant differ-
ences) away from all the other x~ and x~, in contradiction to the cluster
decomposition principle. Loosely speak ing then, the cluster decomposition
principle simply says that the connected part of the 5-matrix, unlike th e
S-matrix itsetf ; contains just a single momentum-conservation delta Junction .
    In order to put this a bit more precisely, we can say that the coefficient
function CP r P f,, .,, P i p_ .. . in Eq .4.3 .9 is a smoo t h function of its momentum
labels. But how smooth? It would be most straightforward if we could
simply requ ire that C'~~yy, .,,~~ n~ . . . be analytic in all of the momenta at p' _
pz                     p i = P2 0 . This requirement would indeed guarantee
that Sx~i s , ' . . .,X i X2 . ., vanishes exponentially fast when any of the x and x' is
very distant from any of the other x and x' . However, an exponential fall-
off of SC is not an essential part of the cluster decomposition principle,
and, in fact, the requirement of analyticity is not met in all theories . Most
notably, in theories with massless particles, S' can have poles at certain
values of the p and p ' . For instance, as we will see in Chapter 10, if a
massless particle can be emitted in the transition I --+ 3 and absorbed in the
transition 2 --* 4, then 5~ .12 will have a term proportional to 1 API - p3 ) 2 .
After Fourier transforming, such poles yield terms in x X2---,Xlx2-- . that fall
off only as negative powers of coordinate differences .' There is no need
to formulate the cluster decomposition principle so stringently that such
behavior is ruled out . Thus the `smoothness' condition on SC should be
understood to allow various poles and branch-cuts at certain values of the
p and p ', but not singulariti es as severe as delta functions .



                      4 .4 Structure of the Interactio n

We now ask, what sort of Hamiltonian will yield an S-matrix that sat-
isfies the cluster decomposition principle? It is here that the formalism
of creation and annihilation operators comes into its non . The answer is
contained in the theorem that the S-matrix satisfies the cluster decompo-
sition principle if (and as far as I know, only if) the Hamiltonian can be
expressed as in E q . (4.2 .8) :
                          ~~.
                                ~          dqi . . . dq nr dql . . . ~~ w
                         N =o M= O J

                           x a~ (q 1 ) . . . a*(q N )a( RM) . a(q1)

                           x hNM(q i . . . qnr , Ri . . . qn f)                  {4 .4.1 }
with coefficient functions hNMthat contain just a single three-dimensional
momentum-conservation delta function (returning here briefly to a more
                            4 . 4 Structure of't he Interaction                                183

explicit notation )



               x hN ~w ( P 1(71 Uzi ' ' " ~ ~~ ~~ nN , A i H i rai ' ' ' P ?~ G'Mnm } , (4 . 4. 2)
where h NM contains no delta function factors . Note that Eq . (4.4.1 ) by
itself has no content -- we saw in Section 4.2 that any operator can be
put in this form. It is only Eq. (4.4.1 ) combined with the requirement that
h NM has only the single delta function shown in Eq . (4.4.2) that guarantees
that the S-matrix satisfies the cluster decomposition principle .
   The validity of this theorem in perturbation theory will become obvious
when we develop the Feynman diagram formalism in Chapter 6 . The
trusting reader may prefer to skip the rest of the present chapter, and
move on to consider the implications of this theorem in Chapter 5 .
However, the proof has some instructive features, and will help to clarify
in what sense the field theory of the next chapter is inevitable.
   To prove this theorem, we make use of perturbation theory in its time-
dependent form . (One of the advantages of time-dependent perturbation
theory is that it makes the cornbinatorics underlying the cluster decom-
position principle much more transparent ; if E is a sum of one-particle
energies then e-aEl is a product of functions of the individual energies,
while [E - E .x + i e ] - 1 is not .) The S -matrix is given b y Eq. (3 . 5.10) as'

     ~~~ = ,      H
                  ~ ~~~ )
                            d tl . . . dtn (D fl , T
                                                   '' ( V(ti) ' ' V (tM )cDa {4 .4.3 }
             ,:=n  r~ .   f
where the Hamiltonian is split into a free-particle part Ha and an interac-
tion V, and
                            V(f) =_ exp(Wt~ t) Vexp(--iHo t) .                 (4 .4 .4)
Now, the states (D., and cD# may be expressed as in Eq. (4.2.2) as products
of creation operators acting on the vacuum cD4, and V(t) is itself a sum of
products of creation and annihilation operators, so each term in the sum
(4.4 .3) may he written as a sum of vacuum expectation values of products
of creation and annihilation operators . By using the commutation or
anticommutation relations (4 .2.5) we may move each annihilation operator
in turn to the right past all the creation operators . For each annihilation
operator moved to the right past a creation operator we have two terms,
as shown by writing Eq . (4 .2 .5) in the for m



 We are now adapting the convention that for n = 0, the time-ordered product in F .q . (4,4 .3) is
 taken as the unit operator, so the n = 0 term in the sum just yields the term ri( # - x ) in S .
184               4 The Cluster Decomposition Principl e

 Moving other creation operators past the annihilation operator in the first
 term generates yet more terms . But Eq . (4,2,4) shows that any annihilation
 operator that moves all the way to the right and acts on (Do gives zero, so
 in the end all we have left is the delta functions . In this way, the vacuum
 expectation value of a product of creation and annihilation operators is
 given by a sum of different terms, each term equal to a product of delta
 functions and ± signs from the commutators or anticommutators . It
 follows that each term in Eq . (4 .4.3) may be expressed as a sum of terms,
 each term equal to a product of delta functions and ± signs from the
 commutators or anticommutators and whatever factors are contributed
 by V(r), integrated over all the times and integrated and summed over the
 momenta, spins, and species in the arguments of the delta functions .
    Each of the terms generated in this way may be symbolized by a
 diagram . (This is not yet the full Feynman diagram formalism, because
 we are not yet going to associate numerical quantities with the ingredients
 in the diagrams ; we are using the diagrams here only as a way of keeping
 track of three-momentum delta functions .) Draw n points, called vertices,
 one for each V(t) operator . For each delta function produced when
 an annihilation operator in one of these V(t) operators moves past a
creation operator in the initial state (D, draw a line coming into the
diagram from below that ends at the corresponding vertex . For each delta
function produced when an annihilation operator in the adjoint of the
final state Op moves past a creation operator in one of the V ( t}, draw
a line from the corresponding vertex upwards out of the diagram . For
each delta function produced when an annihilation operator in one V(t)
moves past a creation operator in another V(t) draw a line between the
two corresponding vertices . Finally, for each delta function produced
when an annihilation operator in the adjoint of the final state moves
past a creation operator in the initial state, draw a line from bottom to
top, right through the diagrams . Each of the delta functions associated
with one of these lines enforces the equality of the momentum arguments
of the pair of creation and annihilation operators represented by the
line . There is also at least one delta function contributed by each of the
vertices, which enforces the conservation of the total three-momentum at
the vertex.
   Such a diagram may be connected (every point connected to every
other b y a set of lines) and if not connected, it breaks up into a number
of connected pieces. The V(t) operator associated with a vertex in one
connected component effectively commutes with the V(t) associated with
any vertex in any other connected component, because for this diagram,
we are not including and terms in which an annihilation operator in one
vertex destroys a particle that is produced by a creation operator in the
other vertex if we did, the two vertices would be in the same connected
                                      4.4 Structure of the Interaction                          185

component . Thus the matrix element in Eq . (4.4 .3) can be expressed as a
sum over products of contributions, one from each connected component :

         ((Dfl, T I V(ti) . . . V(t,) I 10C,
                                                     )

                                       m        ((Dpj, T f V(tp) . . . V(tj.) I(D,,j ),:7 .   (4A,5)
                          c lus te ring s j=1

Here the sum is over all ways of splitting up the incoming and outgoing
particles and V(t) operators into v clusters including a sum over v from
I to n) with the nj operators V (tj,) . . . V(t3,} ) and the subsets of initial
particles a} and final particles flj all in the j th cluster . O f course, this
means that
                                             n = n 1 + . . . + nV
and also the set Lx is the union of all the particles in the subsets a l, ac?, . . . xV,
and likewise for the final state. Some of the clusters in Eq. (4.4.5) may
contain no vertices at all, i.e., nj = 0 ; for these factors, we must take the
matrix element factor in Eq . (4.4 .5) to vanish unless Pj and act are both
one-particle states (in which case it is just a delta function 6(aj - flj)},
because the only connected diagrams without vertices consist of a single
line running through the diagram from bottom to top . Most important,
the subscript C in Eq. (4.4 .5) means that we exclude any contributions
corresponding to disconnected diagrams, that is, any contributions in
which any V(t) operator or any initial or final particle is not connected
to every other by a sequence of particle creations and annihilations .
   Now let us use Eq . {4.4.5} in the sum (4 .4.3). Every time variable is
integrated from -ao to +cxD, so it makes no difference which of the ti, . . . to
are sorted out into each cluster . The sum over clusterings therefore yields
a factor u ! f ni ?n2? --- n,!, equal to the number of ways of sorting out n
vertices into v clusters, each containing n> > n2, • . . vertices
                  'CK~'
                           dt i . . . dtn ((DP!' Tf V(ti) V(tn))(D~~)
             .~    ova

                                 nr
                          i '
                                2'      n,! PA R T nl +~ y j := 1           00
                                                         ni + . ..+n, ~n

                    x ((D#,, T I V (tj, ) . . . V(ti,)J(D,), -

The first sum here is over all ways of partitioning the particles in the
initial and final states into clusters al . . . cc, and X31 . . . P, (including a sum
over the number v of clusters) . The factor n! here cancels the 1/ref in
Eq. (4.4.3), and the factor (----fi)l in the perturbation series for (4 .4.5) can
be written as a product (--i)", . . . so instead of summing over n and
 186                4 The Cluster Decomposition Principl e

then summing separately over ni, . . . n,, constrained by n1 + . . . + rzw = n ,
we can simply sum independently over each ral, . . . nV . This gives finall y


                       PART        j= 1 nf=O       i

                       X   (00J,               1       l



Comparing this with the definition (4 .2 .2) of the connected matrix elements
5fic., we see that these matrix elements are just given by the factors in the
product here
            «~     ~n x
       S~         n dt, dt, (Op, T ~ V(t 1) . . . V(tn)I(D,)c (4 .4.6)
            n=O         00

(The subscript j is dropped on all the t s and n s, as these are now mere
integration and summation variables .) We see that SCE is calculated by a
very simple prescription : S~~ is the sum of all contributions to the S-matrix
that are connected, in the sense that we drop all terms in w hich any initial
orfinal partite or any operator V(t) is not connected to all the others by a
sequence of particle creations and annihilations . This justifies the adjective
`connected' for Sc-
   As we have seen, momentum is conserved at each vertex and along
every line, so the connected parts of the S-matrix individually conserve
momentum : S~ contains a factor 5 -~(p fl - p,,) . What we want to prove is
that SC: contains no other delta functions .
   We now make the assumption that the coefficient fractions hNM in the
expansion (4 .4 .1) of the Hamiltonian in terms of creation and annihilation
operators are proportianai to a single three-dimensional delta function,
that ensures momenta conservation . This is automatically true for the
free-particle Hamiltonian HO~, so it is also then true separately for the
interaction V . Returning to the graphical interpretation of the matrix
elements that we have been using, this means that each vertex contributes
one three-dimensional delta function . (The other delta functions in matrix
elements V, 6 simply keep the momentum of any particle that is not created
or annihilated at the corresponding vertex unchanged .) Now, most of these
delta functions simply go to fix the momentum of intermediate particles .
The only momenta that are left unfixed by such delta functions are those
that circulate in loops of internal lines . (Any line which if cut leaves the
diagram disconnected carries a momentum that is fixed by momentum
conservation as some linear combination of the momenta of the lines
coming into or going out of the diagram . If the diagram has L lines
that can all be cut at the same time without the diagram becoming
disconnected, then we it has L independent loops, and there are L
momenta that are not fixed by momentum conservation .) With V vertices,
I internal lines, and L hoops, there are V delta functions, of which I --- I.
go to fix internal momenta, leaving V - I + L delta functions relating the
momenta of incoming or outgoing particles . But a well-known topological
identity" tells that for any graph consisting of C connected pieces, the
numbers of vertices, internal lines, and loops are related b y

                                          V -I +L=G,                                         (4 .4.7)

Hence for a connected matrix element like Six, which arises from graphs
with C = 1 , we find just a single three-dimensional delta function 63 (P# -
Px ) , as was to be proved .
   It was not important in the above argument that the time variables
were integrated from -oo to +oo . Thus exactly the same arguments can
be used to show that if the coefficients h N , M in the Hamiltonian contain
just single delta functions, then U ( t, to) can also be decomposed into
connected parts, each containing a single momentum-conservation delta
function factor. On the other hand, the connected part of the S-matrix
also contains an energy-conservation delta function, and when we come to
Feynman diagrams in Chapter 6 we shall see that SC contains only a single
energy-conservation delta function, 5( E p - E., ), Zile U(t, to) contains no
energy-conservation delta functions at all .
   It should be emphasized that the requirement that h NXI in Eq . (4.4.1)
should have only a single three-dimensional momentum conservation delta
function factor is very far from trivial, and has far-reaching implications .
For instance, assume that V has non-vanishing matrix elements between
two-particle states. Then Eq . (4.4.1) must contain a teem with N = Al = 2,
and coefficient

                              V') ,z[ P    A P r P2 ) = VP 1 p ;- P i p 2 •     (4.4.8)
                                          i ?,
(We are here temporarily dropping spin and species labels .) But then the
matrix element of the interaction between three-particle states i s


                                              63(
                   + V?,2W1 P'2a P1 132)            P ~ - p3) ± permuttion ~.                (4.4.9 )




  A graph consisting of a single vertex has V = 1, L = 0, and C = 1 . if we add V - 1 vertices
  with just enough internal lines to keep the graph cnnnccted, we have I = V -- 1, L = 0 , and
  C = 1 . Any additional internal lines attached (without new vertices) to the same connected graph
  produce a n equal number of loops, s o I -=V+L-1 and C = 1 . [f a disconnected graph consists
  of C such connected parts, the sums of I . V, and I . in each connected part will than satisfy
  E ! =Y +L---C .
1 8$                  4 The Cluster Decomposition Principle

   As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, we might try to make a
relativistic quantum theory that is not a field theory by choosing V2,2 SO
that the two-body S-matrix is Lorentz-invariant, and adjusting the rest of
the Hamiltonian so that there is no scattering in states containing three
or more particles . We would then have to take X3,3 to cancel the other
terms in Eq. (4.4.9)

   V3-3(P iP '2 P '3, P I Pz P3) = -V2,2( P i P '2, P I Pz) 6 3 ( P '3 - R 3) + permutations .
                                                                                      (4.4. 10)
However, this would mean that each term in V3r3 contains two delta
function factors (recall that V2,2(p gip ;, P1 P2) has a factor 63( P + P 2 - p,
p2) }and this would violate the cluster decomposition principle . Thus
in a theory satisfying the cluster decomposition principle, the existence
of scattering processes involving two particles makes processes involving
three or more particles inevitable .


   When we set out to solve three-body problems in quantum theories
that satisfy the cluster decomposition principle, the term V3 , 3 in Eq. (4.4.9)
gives no particular trouble, but the extra delta function in the other terms
makes the Lippmann-Schwinger equation difficult to solve directly . The
problem is that these delta functions make the kernel [E , - Ep + ie]-1 V O,
of this equation not square-integrable, even after we factor out an overall
momentum conservation delta function . In consequence, it cannot be
approximated by a finite matrix, even one of very large rank . To solve
problems involving three or more particles, it is necessary to replace the
Lippmann-Schwinger equation with one that has a connected right-hand
side . Such equations have been developed for the scattering of three or
more particles,8,9 and in non-relativistic scattering problems they can be
solved recursively, but they have not turned out to be useful in relativistic
theories and so will not be described in detail here.
   However, recasting the L,ippmann-5ch wi equation in this manner
is useful in another way. Our arguments in this section have so far
relied on perturbation theory . I do not know of any non-perturbative
proof of the main theorem of this section, but it has been shown 9 that
these reformulated non-perturbative dynamical equations are c on sistent
with the requirement that Uc(t, ta) (and hence S C) should also contain
only a single momentum-conservation delta function, as required by the
cluster decomposition principle, provided that the Hamiltonian satisfies
our condition that the coefficient functions hN,M each contain only a single
momentum-conservation delta function .
                                      Problems                                189

                                     Pro bl ems

1 . Define generating func t ionals for the S-matrix and its connected
    part :


                       rv-t nrr- 1
                 x S'qi- .- q~~, q ,- .. q, dpi . . . dq fv d~'1 ' ' ' dq m




                 X SC

   Derive a formula relating F[v] and FC [u] . (You may consider the
   purely bosonic case . )

2 . Consider an i nteractio n




   where g is a real constant and a(p) is the annihilation operator of a
   spinless boson of mass M     O. Use perturbation theory to calculate
   the S-matrix element for scattering of these particles in the center-
   of-mass frame to order g2 . What is the corresponding differential
   cross-section ?

3 . A coherent state (DA is defined to be an eigenstate of the annihilation
    operators a(q) with eig envalues ~(9). Construct such a state as a
    superposition of the mult i-particle states (Dq , qa ., . qN .


                                     References

1 . The cluster decomposition principle seems to have been first stated
    explicitly in quantum field theory by E. H. Wichmann and J . H .
    Crichton, Phys. Rev . 132, 2 78 8 ( 1 9 63) .

2. See, e.g., B . Bakamij i an and L. H. Thomas, P hys. Rev . 92, 1 300
   (1953).
3. For references, see T. D . Lee and C. N. Yang, Phys . R ev. 113, 116 5
   (1959).

4. J. Goldstone, 'roc. Roy, Soc . London A239, 267 (1957) .
1 94              4 The Clus ter Decomposition Pr inciple

  5. N. M . Hugenholtz, Physica 23, 481 (1957).
  6. See, e .g-, R . Kubo, J. Math. Phys. 4, 174 (1963).

  7. E. C . Titchmarsh, lntroducricrn to the theory oJ' Fourier Integrals
     (Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1937) : Section 1 .8 .
  8. L. D. Faddeev, Zh, Ekxper, i Teor . Fig. 39. 1 459 (1961) (translation
     Soviet Phys - JETP 1 2, 1014 (1961)) ; DAl. Akad . Nauk. S SS R
     138, 565 (1961) and 14 5, 30 (1962) (translations Soviet Physics -
     Doklady 6, 3 84 (196 1) and 7, 600 (1963)} .
  9 . S. Weinberg, Phys. Rev. 1 33, B232 (1964)
