28.7 Baryon and Lepton Non-Conservation 235
quantum numbers as the Higgs doublets that the mixing between these
superfields would lower the mass of the doublet messengers so much that
the lightest R-odd particle would be the gluino.***) Detailed calculations
including the effects of SU(2) x U(1) breaking indicate that here is a large
region of parameter space in which the next-to-lightest R-odd particle is
one of the two tau sleptons.°?

28.7 Baryon and Lepton Non-Conservation

The extra particles in supersymmetric models provide several new mech-
anisms for baryon and lepton non-conservation. We saw in Section 28.1
that there are various baryon- and lepton-number non-conserving super-
symmetric operators (28.1.2) and (28.1.3) of dimensionality four that can
be included in a renormalizable SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1)-invariant theory
and that would lead to processes like proton decay at a catastrophic
rate. These terms can be excluded from the Lagrangian by imposing
R parity conservation (or, equivalently, invariance under a change of
sign of all quark and lepton chiral superfields) but this does not exclude
various SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1)-invariant but baryon- and lepton-number
non-conserving operators of dimensionality d > 4. As discussed in Sec-
tion 21.3, if there is an underlying mechanism for baryon and lepton
non-conservation characterized by some high mass scale M, then these
operators will appear in the effective Lagrangian of the standard model
with coefficients proportional to M*~4. With only the fields of the non-
supersymmetric standard model, operators that can violate baryon con-
servation have a minimum dimensionality six,*° and thus give baryon
non-conserving amplitudes proportional to M~?. The new fields required
by supersymmetry lead to two important changes in estimates of baryon
non-conserving processes like proton and bound neutron decay. As we
saw in Section 28.2, the change in the renormalization group equations
gives larger estimates of M, which decreases the effect of the dimension
six operators. At the same time, these new fields allow the construction of
new operators of dimensionality five, which give baryon non-conserving
amplitudes proportional to M~! and are therefore likely to make the
dominant contribution to proton and bound neutron decay.>”

The supersymmetric operators of dimensionality five that can be formed
out of chiral superfields (generically called ®) are of the forms (®*®®)p
and (®O®O®)z, and their complex conjugates. (We do not consider
operators that include derivatives or gauge fields, because they do not
offer any additional possibility of baryon or lepton non-conservation.) In
the notation of Section 28.1, the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1)-invariant operators
