234 28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

theories are characterized by a very high energy scale of supersymmetry
breaking, in various versions of order either 10!! GeV or 10!3 GeV. There
have been several suggestions*> on ways to obtain acceptable values of
Buy and p in theories in which supersymmetry is broken at relatively low
energy, such as theories of gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking, but
none of them is particularly compelling. Also, since we do not know
where » comes from, we do not have any reason to suppose that it is
real, so theories of gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking are at risk of
yielding too much CP violation, just as in the more general framework of
Section 28.4.

Like the scalar squared masses m{ and m}, the parameters Ajj and
C;j in Eq. (28.4.1) are given by two-loop diagrams. However, they have
the dimensions of mass rather than mass squared, and they are much less
than the scalar and gaugino masses, so they make a relatively unimportant
contribution to supersymmetry breaking.

As in any model with supersymmetry broken at energies much less
than 10!° GeV, the lightest R-odd particle in all models based on gauge-
mediated supersymmetry breaking is the gravitino. As we will see in
Section 31.3, the gravitino mass is of the order of ./G times the squared
energy F characteristic of supersymmetry breaking, defined so that the
vacuum energy is F?/2. Where supersymmetry is broken by the ¥-
terms ¥,9 of the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1)-neutral chiral superfields S,, we
have F? = >>,,|¥no|*. If there are no large dimensionless quantities in
the Lagrangian for the S,, then squark masses in this model are of the
order of g?,/F/16n* ~ 10~*./F, so in order for this to be less than the
naturalness bound of 104 GeV, we must have ,/F < 10° GeV, which gives
a gravitino mass less than 1 keV. Gravitational couplings are so weak at
accessible energies that it is only the helicity +1/2 states of the gravitino
that can actually be produced, and these behave just like goldstino states.
As shown by Eq. (27.5.12), in the models discussed here the goldstino
field appears with coefficient i./2%, in the fermionic component yp, of
S,. Goldstinos are emitted in the decay of the R-odd sparticles into the
corresponding R-even particles of the standard model through radiative
corrections, with goldstinos emerging from vertices connecting internal
Wn and Y,, lines. According to Eq. (29.2.10), the goldstino emission
amplitudes are inversely proportional to F, which makes these decays
comparatively slow, although perhaps fast enough to be observed.

Because the decay of R-odd particles into goldstinos is slow, it is
phenomenologically important in these models to identify the next-to-
lightest R-odd particle, into which all the heavier R-odd particles will decay
before it in turn decays into a goldstino. As we have seen, the next-to-
lightest R-odd particle is usually a slepton, wino, or bino. (It is possible in
models with a messenger superfield having the same S$ U(3) x SU(2) x U(1)
