224 28 Supersymmetric Standard Models

3 2 \2 1\2 ( 92 \?
Mi = 23) Mon F (5) T+ (5) (=) ry
M2 =257 m2, (2 T.

E » sn (; | In >
where Q, U, D, L, and E are the scalar superpartners of the left-handed
quark doublets, the left-handed antiquarks of charge —2e/3 and +e/3, the
left-handed lepton doublets, and the left-handed charged antileptons, and
Msn are some new masses that characterize the nth messenger superfields.
(The factor 2 is extracted from M2, for future convenience.) The squark
and slepton masses that are produced in this way are automatically the
same in all three generations, thus avoiding the problem with flavor-
changing processes discussed in Section 28.4.

We expect all M,, and Ms, to be roughly of the same order of magni-
tude, so that the gluino and squarks will have comparable masses, while
the wino, bino, and sleptons will be much lighter, with masses suppressed
by squares of electroweak coupling constants.

We can go considerably further than this with some reasonable dynam-
ical assumptions. Suppose that the effects of supersymmetry breaking on
the messenger superfields may be modeled by including these superfields
along with a set of SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1)-neutral chiral superfields S,, (not
necessarily all distinct) in a superpotential

f(®,®,S) = S718, ©, , (28.6.5)

n
where ®,, and ©, are left-chiral messenger superfields in complex-conjugate
representations of SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1) and A, are a set of coupling
coefficients. (Here and below we suppress the SU(3) x SU(2) indices that
are summed over in calculating scalar products like ®,®,.) The superfields
S, are supposed to have non-vanishing vacuum expectation values /, and
¥~, for their scalar and auxiliary components, respectively. It is the non-
zero values of ¥,, that in these models introduce supersymmetry breaking
in the masses of the ®, and ®, particles. Section 26.4 shows that, with
gauge couplings neglected, the squared masses of the spinor components
of ®, (and ®,) are the eigenvalues of the matrix M's Mn, with .@,, defined
by Eq. (26.4.11), which gives
0 aAnFZn

Mn = ( Inhn 0 )
so that the messenger fermions have masses |A,%,|. To find the mass
terms for the scalar components ¢, and @, of the ®, and ®, superfields,
we note that integrating out the auxiliary fields of the ®, and ®, yields a
