28.6 Gauge Mediation of Supersymmetry Breaking 229
where M? = >~, M2(d)T(d). Eqs. (28.6.2) and (28.6.4) would then yield
Eqs. (28.6.13) and (28.6.14), except with M, in place of TM and M? in
place of 2T M2. But the assumption that M,, and M;, respect invariance
under G is implausible if the messenger mass scale is far below the grand
unified scale, since whatever we assume about a grand unified gauge
group, the SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1) gauge interactions would make coupling
constants like A, run differently for ®,, with different SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1)
quantum numbers in the same representation of the grand unified group.

These results are subject to various radiative corrections, of which the
most important is that we must use values of g,, g, and g’ renormalized at
a scale comparable to the mass being calculated. Indeed, the gaugino mass
ratios given in Eq. (28.6.13) could also be derived under quite different
assumptions: that all gaugino masses are equal at the grand unification
scale where the coupling constants are related by g? = g* = 5g”/3 and
become different at lower energies as described by the renormalization
group equations.

For an illustrative example of numerical results, suppose that the mes-
senger superfields form an SU(2) singlet SU(3) triplet with charge e/3
and an SU(2) doublet SU(3) singlet with charges 0 and —e, together
with left-chiral superfields in the complex-conjugate representations of
SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1). Then, as already mentioned, Eq. (28.6.3) is satisfied
with T = 2 x 1/2 = 1, so by using the correct values of the gauge cou-
plings, the masses of the squarks, gluino, L sleptons, wino, E sleptons, and
bino are calculated to be in the ratios*4 11.6 :: 7.0 ::2.5 2:2 :: 1.1 :: 10.
In larger representations of G we could have T > 1, in which case the
gluino would be the heaviest of these particles, and the sleptons the lightest
ones.

There are also radiative corrections aside from the running of the gauge
couplings. According to one calculation,*4 in the model with an SU(2)
singlet SU(3) triplet with charge e/3 and an SU(2) doublet SU(3) singlet
with charges 0 and —e, together with left-chiral superfields in the complex-
conjugate representations of SU(3) x SU(2) x U(1), radiative corrections
give the ratios of the masses of the squarks, gluino, L sleptons, wino, E
sleptons, and bino as 9.3 :: 6.4 :: 2.6 :: 1.9 :: 1.35 :: 1.0.

As we saw in the previous section, the wino and bino may mix with
the charged and neutral higgsinos, so the wino and bino masses that
have been calculated here must be regarded as inputs to a calculation of
physical masses of mixtures known as charginos and neutralinos, rather
than physical masses themselves.

Now we shall consider the masses of the Higgs scalars in these models.
If we were to consider only the two-loop diagrams by which these scalars
get masses through gauge interactions with the supersymmetry-breaking
sector, then since (apart from signs) they have the same SU(3) x SU(2) x
