                                                                                                  3P7d                                                                                           Lent 2015


                                                                                                             Supersymmetry and Extra Dimensions:
                                                                                                                                    Example Sheet 4

                                                                                                             Corrections and suggestions should be emailed to f.quevedo@damtp.cam.ac.uk



                                                                                               Exercise 4.1:    Consider the Schrödinger equation for a particle moving in two dimensions x and y.




Copyright © 2015 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                               The second dimension is a circle or radius r. The potential corresponds to a square well (V (x) = 0 for
                                                                                               x ∈ (0, a) and V = ∞ otherwise). Derive the energy levels for the two-dimensional Schrödinger equation
                                                                                               and compare the result with the standard one-dimensional situation in the limit r ≪ a.


                                                                                               Exercise 4.2:    Consider the following Lagrangian
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                          1
                                                                                                                                Z
                                                                                                                                                     µνρ       µνρσ
                                                                                                                        S =        d4 x      H µνρ H     + a ǫ      ∂  H
                                                                                                                                                                      µ νρσ   .
                                                                                                                                          g2
                                                                                               Solve the equation of motion for the Lagrange multiplier a to obtain an action for a propagating massless
                                                                                               Kalb-Ramond field Bµν . Alternatively, solve the equation of motion for the field Hνρσ , to obtain an action
                                                                                               for the propagating axion field a. What happens to the coupling g under this transformation? Generalise
                                                                                               your result for arbitrary dimensions and ranks of the tensors.


                                                                                               Exercise 4.3:     Consider a massive antisymmetric tensor of rank q in D dimensions. Write up its
                                                                                               Lagrangian up-to second derivatives. Describe a general Lagrangian that can reproduce the original
                                                                                               Lagrangian and its dual. Determine the degrees of freedom of the original and dual tensors. Interpret
                                                                                               this dualisation in terms of a functional Fourier transform. Can this also be used in the massless case?


                                                                                               Exercise 4.4 On spacetimes with Lorentzian signature show that only in dimensions D = 4k + 2 there
                                                                                               can be self-dual antisymmetric tensors. How many degrees of freedom do they have? What kind of
                                                                                               p-branes they couple to? Explain the difference, if any, with Euclidean spaces.


                                                                                               Exercise 4.5:    Show that the Kaluza-Klein dimensional reduction from D = 5 to D = 4 follows from
                                                                                               a pure gravitational theory in five-dimensions, using (5) R = (4) R − 2e−σ ∇2 eσ − 41 e2σ Fµν F µν where
                                                                                               G55 = e2σ . Relate the gauge transformation to the U (1) isometry of the compact space.


                                                                                               Exercise 4.6    Demonstrate that the volume of a N − 1 sphere of radius r is

                                                                                                                                                     2π N/2 N −1
                                                                                                                                         VN −1 =            r                                           (1)
                                                                                                                                                     Γ(N/2)
                                                                                                                                                           2             PN
                                                                                                                                                     dN xe−ρ with ρ2 =         2
                                                                                                                                                 R
                                                                                               Hint: It may help to consider the integral IN =                            i=1 xi . Use this result to derive
                                                                                               an expression for the electric (and gravitational) potential in D dimensions. Show that the potential due
                                                                                               to a point particle in five dimensions reduces to the 4-dimensional potential at distances much larger than
                                                                                               the size of the fifth dimension.
                                                                                               2

                                                                                               Exercise 4.7:    Consider a five dimensional gravity theory with a negative cosmological constant Λ < 0,
                                                                                               compactified on an interval (0, π). Each end of the interval corresponds to a ’3-brane’ which we choose
                                                                                               to have tension ±Λ/k respectively. Here k is a common scale to be determined later in terms of the
                                                                                               fundamental scale in 5D M∗ and Λ. Verify that the warped metric

                                                                                                                                 ds2 = e−2A(θ) ηµν dxµ dxν − r2 dθ2

                                                                                               satisfies Einstein’s equations. Here W = e−2A(θ) is the warp factor and r is a constant measuring the
                                                                                               size of the interval. You can use that Einstein’s equations reduce to
                                                                                                                     6 A′2          Λ          3 A′′          Λ                     
                                                                                                                             = −        ,              =              δ(θ − π) − δ(θ) .
                                                                                                                       r2          2M∗3         r2         2 M∗3 kr
                                                                                               Solve for A(θ) and use the warp factor to show that the effective 4D Planck scale is now




Copyright © 2015 University of Cambridge. Not to be quoted or reproduced without permission.
                                                                                                                                        Z π
                                                                                                                          2         3                      M∗3            
                                                                                                                        Mpl = M∗ r          dθ e−2A =            1 − e−2kr .
                                                                                                                                         −π                 k
                                                                                               Find the value of the constant k. Consider the Higgs Lagrangian on the brane at θ = π, bring it into
                                                                                               canonical form and show that the mass is proportional to the factor e−kπr . How large can r be in order
                                                                                               to reproduce the electroweak scale from the Planck scale? Does this solve the hierarchy problem? How
                                                                                               does the Planck scale differ from the 5D scale M∗ ?


                                                                                               Exercise 4.8:    Imagine that it were possible to have particles with all possible spins up to j = 3. What
                                                                                               would the maximum dimensionality of spacetime be consistent with supersymmetry?


                                                                                               Exercise 4.9:    Starting with the field contents of IIA and IIB supergravities in D = 10 perform the
                                                                                               dimensional reduction to D = 9 and count the number of degrees of freedom for each multiplet. Is
                                                                                               the spectrum chiral? Perform directly the reduction from D = 11 to D = 9 and compare. Perform
                                                                                               dimensional reduction of IIB supergravity in D = 10 all the way to D = 4 and compare the number of
                                                                                               degrees of freedom.


                                                                                               Exercise 4.10:    Consider N = 1 supergravity with three chiral superfields S, T, and C. In Planck units,
                                                                                               the Kähler potential and superpotential are given by

                                                                                                                             K   =   − log (S + S ∗ ) − 3 log (T + T ∗ − CC ∗ )
                                                                                                                             W   =   C 3 + a e−αS + b ,

                                                                                               where a, b are arbitrary complex numbers and α > 0. Compute the scalar potential. Find the auxiliary
                                                                                               field for S, T, C and verify that supersymmetry is broken. Assuming that C denotes a matter field with
                                                                                               vanishing vev, find a minimum of the potential. Are there flat directions? A typical Kähler potential
                                                                                               derived from string compactifications takes the form

                                                                                                                                             K = −3 log Γ(τi )                                        (2)

                                                                                               where Γ is a homogeneous function of degree one of moduli fields τi . Using the homogeneity equations
                                                                                               τi Γi = Γ and τi Γij = 0 (where Γi = ∂Γ/∂τi , etc. ) show that

                                                                                                                                 τi Kij = 3Γj /Γ ,         −1
                                                                                                                                                       Γi Kij Γj /Γ2 = 1/3

                                                                                               and deduce from this that if the superpotential does not depend on the τi fields then the corresponding
                                                                                               contribution to the N = 1 supergravity scalar potential V vanishes.
